Thus questioned by the magnanimous Raghava, the illustrious Kumbhayoni answered as follows:—
""Learn, O Rama, of the brilliant exploits of that warrior and how he slew his adversaries without being wounded by them; but first I shall tell you of Ravana's birth and lineage, O Raghava, and thereafter of the rare boon accorded to his son.
""In former times, during the Kritayuga, there lived a son of Prajapati, O Rama, and that lord, Paulastya by name, was a Paramarishi equal to the Grandsire of the World Himself. One is unable to enumerate all the virtues he owed to his excellent character and it is sufficient to say that he was the son of Prajapati and, as such, was the favourite of the Gods. He was beloved of the entire world on account of his charming qualities and great wisdom. In order to pursue his ascetic practices, that foremost of Munis repaired to the hermitage of Trinabindu and took up his abode on the slopes of the great Mountain Meru. There, that virtuous soul, his senses fully controlled, gave himself up to the practice of austerity, but some youthful maidens, whose fathers were Rishis, Pannagas and Rajarishis, wandering in those solitudes, disturbed him. Accompanied by Apsaras, they came to divert themselves in that place and, as it was possible to find fruits in every season and disport oneself in those woods, the young girls constantly went there to play. Attracted by the charms of Paulastya's retreat, they sang, played their instruments and danced, thus in full innocence, distracting the hermit from the exercise of his penances.
""On this, that mighty and exalted Sage cried out in indignation:—
""'She who falls under my gaze, will instantly conceive!'
""Thereupon all those maidens, who heard the magnanimous Sage, terrified of the brahmin's curse, left that place; but the daughter of the Sage Trinabindu had not heard it. Entering the wood, wandering here and there without fear, she was unable to find the companions who had accompanied her.
""At that moment the illustrious and mighty Rishi, born of Prajapati, was concentrating on the sacred scriptures, his soul purified by asceticism. Hearing the recitation of the Veda, that youthful maiden approached, and beholding that treasury of asceticism, she instantly grew pale and manifested all the signs of pregnancy. Thereupon, discovering her condition, she became extremely bewildered and said:—
""'What has happened to me?' Thereafter, realising the truth, she returned to her father's hermitage.
""On seeing her in that state, Trinabindu said:—
"'What means this strange condition in which you dost find thyself?'
""Thereat, with joined palms, the unfortunate girl answered that treasury of asceticism, saying:—
""'I do not know, Dear Father, what has brought me to this pass. Preceded by my companions, I had gone to visit the sacred hermitage of that great and pure-souled Rishi Paulastya. Thereafter I was unable to find any of those who had accompanied me to the woods but, perceiving the alteration in my body, seized with fear, I returned here.'
""Then that Rajarishi Trinabindu, of radiant aspect, entered into meditation awhile and it was revealed to him that this was the work of the ascetic and, the curse of that great and pure-souled Sage having been made clear to him, he, taking his daughter, went to where Paulastya was to be found and said to him:—
""'O Blessed One, accept this daughter of mine in all her native perfection as alms spontaneously offered. O Great Rishi, assuredly she will ever be completely obedient to you who art given to the practice of asceticism and to the mortification of the senses.'
""Hearing the words of the virtuous Rajarishi, that Twice-born One, who was willing to accept the young girl, said:—'It is well!' and, having given his daughter to that king of Sages, Trinabindu returned to his hermitage whilst the young wife remained with her consort, gratifying him with her virtue.
"Her character and conduct so charmed that powerful and exalted Sage that, in his delight, he addressed her, saying:—
""'O Lady of lovely limbs, I am well pleased with thine outstanding virtues and will confer on you a son like unto myself who will perpetuate both our houses; he will be known by the name of Paulastya and, as you have listened to me reciting the Veda, he will also be called Vishravas.'
""Thus, his heart filled with delight, did the ascetic speak to his divine consort and, in a short time, she gave birth to a son, Vishravas, who was famed in the Three Worlds and full of glory and piety. Learned, looking on all with an equal eye, happy in the fulfilment of his duty, like unto his sire inclined to asceticism, such was Vishravas.
