The son of Paulastya, that foremost of Munis, was not long in establishing himself in asceticism like his sire. Loyal, virtuous, devoted to the study of the Veda, pure, detached from all the pleasures of life, his duty was his constant aim.
Hearing of the life he was leading, the great Muni Bharadva ja gave his own daughter of radiant complexion to him and Vishravas accepted Bharadvajas daughter with traditional rites and began to consider how he might perpetuate his line and happiness. In extreme delight, that foremost of the ascetics, conversant with his duty, begot with his wife a wonderful child full of vigour, endowed with all the brahmic qualities [Such as self-control, purity, austerity, etc.].
At the birth of this child, his paternal grandfather was filled with joy, and Paulastya, beholding him, bethought himself how he might make him happy. He shall become the Guardian of Wealth, he said in his delight, which was shared by all the Sages, and he gave him a name, saying:—
Since the child resembles Vishravas, he shall be known as Vaishravana!
Thereafter Vaishravana, retiring to pastoral solitudes, grew up to resemble the mighty Anala, who is invoked at the time of sacrifice and, while he sojourned in that retreat, the thought came to that magnanimous one, I will pursue my supreme duty; the path of duty is the highest path.
For a thousand years he gave himself up to asceticism in the great forest and practising severe austerities, performed heavy penances. At the end of a thousand years, he underwent the following discipline—drinking water, he fed on air alone or took no nourishment whatsoever.
A thousand ages passed like a single year, whereupon the mighty Brahma, accompanied by the Hosts of the Gods and their leaders, came to the hermitage and said to him:—
I am highly gratified with thine accomplishments, O Devoted Son, now choose a boon! May prosperity attend you; you dost merit a favour, O Sage!
Then Vaishravana answered the Grandsire of the World, who stood near and said:—
O Blessed One, I desire to be the saviour and protector of the world!
In the satisfaction of his soul, Brahma, who was accompanied by the Celestial Host, joyfully answered:—
So be it! It is my desire to create four Guardians of the Worlds. Now there shall be the region of Yama, the region of Indra, the region of Varuna and the one sought by you. Go, O Virtuous Ascetic, and reign over the dominion of wealth 1 With Shakra, Varuna, the Lord of the Waters, and Yama, you shalt be the fourth. Receive as your vehicle this chariot named Pushpaka, which is as bright as the sun, and be equal to the Gods. Be happy, we shall now return from whence we came, having accomplished that which we had to do by conferring this double gift, O Dear Son!
With these words, Brahma withdrew to the region of the Gods and when the Celestial Host, with the Grandsire at their head, had gone to the heavenly region, Vaishravana, having become the Lord of Wealth, humbly addressed his sire with joined palms and said:—
O Blessed One, I have received a rare boon from the Grandsire of the World, but the divine Prajapati has not assigned me a dwelling place; do you therefore counsel me, O Blessed One, O Lord, as to where an agreeable retreat may be found where no suffering comes to any living being.
At these words of his son, Vaishravana, the foremost of the ascetics answered saying:—
Hear, O Most Virtuous of Men! On the shores of the ocean, to the south there is a mountain named Trikuta. On its lofty summit, which is as great as the capital of the mighty Indra, the ravishing City of Lanka was constructed by Vishvakarma for the Rakshasas and it resembles Amaravati. Do you dwell in Lanka and be happy! Do not hesitate! With its moats, golden walls, engines of war and the weapons with which it is filled, with its gold and emerald archways, that city is a marvel 1 The Rakshasas left it formerly in fear of Vishnu and it is deserted, all the demons having gone to the nethermost region. Now Lanka is empty and has no protector. Go and inhabit it, My Son, and be happy! No harm will visit you there.
Hearing the words of his sire, the virtuous Vaishravana went to dwell in Lanka on the summit of the mountain, and soon, under his rule, it was filled with thousands of delighted Nairritas disporting themselves.
That righteous King of the Nairritas, the blessed Sage Vaishravana, dwelt in Lanka, that city surrounded by the sea and, from time to time, the saintly Lord of Wealth, in the Pushpaka Chariot, went to visit his father and mother. Hymned by the Hosts of the Gods and Gandharvas and entertained by the dances of the Apsaras, that Guardian of Wealth, radiating glory like unto the sun, went to visit his sire.