When the army that followed him was destroyed by Padmanabha, Malyavan halted in his flight, as the ocean when it reaches the shore. His eyes red with anger, his head trembling, that ranger of the night said to Padmanabha, the Supreme Purusha
O Narayana, You are ignorant of the ancient tradition of warriors, since You, as if a stranger to their caste, dost slay those who, in their terror, have retreated in the fight. That assassin who commits the sin of slaying a foe who has turned his back on him, O Chief of the Gods, does not attain heaven, as do the virtuous on leaving this world. Assuredly if You dost desire to enter into combat, You Who art armed with conch, discus and mace, here I stand! Manifest Your prowess that I may witness it!
Seeing Malyavan standing motionless, like unto the mountain of that name, the younger brother of the King of the Gods, in his valour, answered the foremost of the Rakshasas, saying:—
I have vowed to the Gods that I will deliver them from the terror you have inspired, by slaying you, I shall honour that pledge. The welfare of the Gods is dearer to me than life itself; therefore I shall destroy you all; now descend into the lowest hell!
Thus did the Lord of Lords speak, He Whose eyes resembled crimson lotuses and, filled with fury, the Rakshasa, with his spear, cut open his breast. Wielded by Malyavans arm, that weapon emitting the sound of a bell, glittered in the breast of Hari like lightning athvart a cloud. Thereafter, He Who is dear to the God Who bears the Spear [i.e., Karttikeya, also called Skanda] drawing out that lance, hurled it at Malyavan and, as formerly Skanda loosed it, that weapon, flying from the hand of Govinda, rushed on the Rakshasa like unto a great meteor striking the Anjana Mountain, and it fell on his mighty chest, that was adorned with innumerable diamonds, as lightning strikes a rocky summit. That blow cut his mail asunder and his eyes were veiled but, recovering consciousness, he stood erect once more, like unto an immoveable rock. Armed with an iron club with innumerable spikes, he struck the God violently in the centre of the breast and, in his martial ardour, having wounded the younger brother of Vasava with his fist, that ranger of the night retreated a bows length. At that moment, the cry Excellent, Excellent arose in the sky.
Thereafter the Rakshasa attacked Garuda, and Vainateya incensed, drove him off with the blast of his wings as a violent tempest disperses a heap of withered leaves.
Seeing his elder brother driven back by the blast of Garudas wings, Sumali, overcome with confusion, with his troops fled in the direction of Lanka. And thrust back by the violence of the wind produced by those wings, Malyavan also, joined by his forces, fled to Lanka covered with shame.
O Lotus-eyed Prince, the Rakshasas having been repeatedly defeated in the battle by Hari and having lost the most valiant of their leaders, in their inability to withstand Vishnu, Who was destroying them, abandoned Lanka and went to dwell in Patala with their consorts. O Prince of the House of Raghu, those Rakshasas, renowned for their strength and who were the issue of the Salakatankata Race, remained under the leadership of Sumali. It was You Who didst destroy those warriors of the family of Paulastya named Sumali, Malyavan, Mali and their companions, who were all exceedingly resourceful and more powerful than Ravana. None other could have subdued the enemies of the Gods or have weeded out those thorns in the side of the Celestials, save Narayana, the God Who bears the conch, discus and mace. You are that Four-armed God, Narayana, eternal, invincible and immutable, Who came to exterminate the Rakshasas. You are the Father of all Beings, who, whenever righteousness declines and for love of those who take refuge in You, dost appear to wipe out evil-doers.
O Lord of Men, I have related in detail all that concerns the origin of the Rakshasas. Learn further, O Prince of the Raghus, of the immeasurable power of Ravana and his sons.
For a long time, Sumali wandered about the nether regions, tormented by the fear of Vishnu, whilst the mighty God of Wealth, surrounded by his sons and grandsons, sojourned in Lanka.