After a time, that Rakshasa, named Sumali, emerged from the nether regions to range the world of men. With his earrings of pure gold, he, like unto a dark cloud, took with him a young girl who resembled Shri without her lotus and, as that Rakshasa wandered about the earth, he beheld the Lord of Wealth, who in his Chariot Pushpaka was going to visit his sire. Beholding that son of Paulastya, that lord who was as radiant as a God, advancing towards him like unto fire, he, amazed, returned to Rasatala from the world of men.
Thereafter that exceedingly intelligent Rakshasa reflected Which is the best way of increasing our power?
Thus did the foremost of the Rakshasas, who was like unto a dark cloud and was wearing golden earrings, reflect within himself and, having considered awhile, that extremely sagacious Rakshasa said to his daughter Kaikasi, for such was her name:—
My Daughter, it is time for you to wed; your youth is slipping away and, afraid of being refused, those who are in love with you do not pay their suit. Striving to fulfil our duty, we seek only thine advantage. Assuredly, you are endowed with every good attribute and resemblest Shri in person, O Dear Child! A young daughter is a source of anxiety to her father who is concerned for her honour, nor does he know whom she will wed. O Beloved Child, the mothers family, the fathers family and the one into which she is received are all three involved in this anxiety. Do you therefore seek out that blessed ascetic, the foremost of Paulastyas offspring and choose Vishravas, the descendant of Paulastya, O My Daughter. Assuredly you will beget sons equal to that Lord of Wealth, who, in his splendour, rivals the sun.
At these words, in filial obedience, that young girl went to seek out Vishravas where he was undergoing penance. At that time, O Rama, that Twice-born, the issue of Paulastya was engaged in the Fire Sacrifice and himself appeared like unto a fourth fire. Heedless of the late hour and, in obedience to her sire, she presented herself before the ascetic and, halting there with her eyes cast down, fixed on her feet, she scratched the earth from time to time with her toe.
Beholding that lovely girl, whose face resembled the full moon and who shone in her own radiance, that Muni of exalted lineage, enquired of her saying:—
O Fortunate One, whose daughter art you? From whence dost you come and for what reason or with what motive? Answer me truthfully, O Beautiful One?
Thus questioned, the young girl with joined palms, answered:
By thine own powers, O Muni, you must be conversant with mine intentions! Learn only, O Brahmarishi, that it is by the command of my sire that I have come, and Kaikasi is my name. The rest must be known to you.
Thereafter the Muni, reflecting awhile, uttered these words:—
I know well, O Fortunate One, what brings you here, you are desirous of having sons by me, you whose gait is like unto an intoxicated elephant! But, having presented thyself at this hour, hear me, O Fortunate One, you shalt bring forth offspring of a dark aspect delighting in the companionship of doers of evil deeds. O Lady of Lovely Form, you shalt beget Rakshasas of cruel exploits.
At these words, Kaikasi prostrated herself, saying:—
O Blessed One who recitest the Veda, I do not desire such sons whose nature is depraved, from you, be gracious unto me!
Thus besought by that youthful maiden, Vishravas, foremost among Munis, like unto the moon in the presence of Rohini, added:—
O Lady of Lovely Face, the son you shalt bring forth last will be like unto me, assuredly he will be virtuous.
Thus did he speak to that young girl, O Rama, and after some time she gave birth to a hideous child with the face of a demon, exceedingly dark; and he had ten necks and great teeth and resembled a heap of collyrium; his lips were of the hue of copper, he had twenty arms and a vast mouth and his hair was fiery red. At his birth, jackals and other wild beasts with flaming jaws circled from left to right. The God Parjanya let loose a rain of blood whilst clouds emitted harsh sounds; the sun ceased to shine, fierce winds blew and the unchanging ocean, Lord of the Rivers, was agitated.
His father, who resembled the Grandsire of the World, thereupon conferred a name upon him and said:—
This child with ten necks shall be called Dashagriva.
After him the mighty Kumbhakarna was born, that giant who was unequalled on earth, and a daughter of hideous aspect, named Shurpanakha, while Kaikasis last child was named Bibishana.
When this great being was born, a rain of flowers fell and, in the heavens, celestial gongs resounded whilst an aerial voice cried, Excellent, Excellent.
Thereafter Kumbhakarna and Dashagriva throve in that vast forest and each was exceedingly powerful and they were scourgers of the worlds. The insensate Kumbhakarna ranged the Three Worlds devouring the great Rishis who were fixed in their duty, and yet he remained unsatisfied.
As for the virtuous Bibishana, ever vowed to righteousness, the study of the Veda being his chief nourishment, he lived as the subduer of his senses.
After a time Vaishravana, the Lord of Wealth, went to visit his sire in his Chariot Pushpaka and, seeing him flaming with effulgence, the Rakshasi sought out Dashagriva and said to him:—
My Son, behold Vaishravana, your brother, blazing with glory and behold your state, who art of the same family, O Dashagriva. You who art of immeasurable might, strive to be like Vaishravana himself.
Hearing his mothers words, the arrogant Dashagriva experienced a wave of overpowering bitterness, whereupon he formulated this vow.
I swear to you in truth that I shall become my brothers equal if not his superior in power; banish any fears that may have entered thine heart!
Thereafter, in his spleen, Dashagriva, accompanied by his younger brother, began to undertake an exceedingly difficult task, undergoing a rigid penance.
(He thought) I shall accomplish mine end by asceticism and having thus resolved, he went to the lovely hermitage of Gokarna in order to purify his soul. There that Rakshasa with his younger brother performed unsurpassed austerities. Such were his mortifications that he gratified the Lord, the Grandsire of the World, who, in his satisfaction, granted him those boons that would assure him of victory.