One day, Yudhajita, the King of Kaikaya, sent his spiritual Preceptor, Gargya, the son of Angiras, a Brahmarishi of immeasurable glory, to the magnanimous Raghava, with ten thousand horses as a token of his unsurpassed affection, and also carpets, gems, diverse splendid stuffs and brilliant ornaments; such were the gifts bestowed on Rama by that monarch.
Hearing of the arrival of that great Rishi Gargya with those magnificent presents from Ashvapati, his maternal uncle, the virtuous Raghava went out with his suite to meet him to the distance of a mile, and he offered homage to him, as Shakra pays obeisance to Brihaspati.
Having paid salutations to the Rishi and accepted the gifts, he enquired of him fully regarding the welfare of his mother's brother and family. Ushering the blessed Rishi into his palace, Rama began to question him, saying:—
"What message has my uncle confided to you in sending you hither?"
Having come there, that great Rishi, hearing Rama's words, unfolded his mission in eloquent terms, saying:—
"This, O Long-armed Hero, is what your maternal uncle, Yudhajita, in his affection for you, requests you to hear. There is a country of the Gandharvas, rich in fruit and roots, situated on the banks of the Sindhu River; that country is extremely fertile. The Gandharvas, armed and skilful warriors, defend it. When you have conquered them, O Virtuous Kakutstha and destroyed their magnificent citadels, take possession of their cities, which are well constructed. None other can achieve this; the country is extremely beautiful; do you follow my counsel, it is to thine advantage."
This speech of his uncle's, conveyed by the great Rishi, pleased Raghava who replied "So be it 1" and he glanced at Bharata; thereafter, delighted, Raghava, with joined palms, spoke again to that Twice-born, saying:—
"These two youthful princes will explore the country, O BrahmarishiI Bharata is the father of these valiant youths, Taksha and Pushkala. Under the protection of my uncle, they will show themselves to be devoted in the discharge of their duty. With Bharata at their head, those two youthful princes, accompanied by their troops, will slay the sons of the Gand-harvas and take possession of the two cities. Having subdued those two great capitals and installed his two sons, my very virtuous brother will return once more."
Thus did Rama speak to that Brahmarishi, and thereafter issued orders to Bharata to start out with his army, having first installed those youthful princes.
Under the constellation Saumya [i.e., The planet Mercury], preceded by the son of Angiras, Bharata set out with his troops and his two sons, and it seemed as if that army, leaving Ayodhya, followed to a great distance by Raghava, could not have been approached even by the Gods themselves. Then those beings who live on flesh, and titans of colossal stature, followed in Bharara's train, thirsting for blood, and the redoubtable Bhutagramas, in their desire to devour the corpses of the Gandharvas, came in hundreds and thousands, and lions, tigers, boars and birds in countless numbers preceded the troops. In a month and a half, that army composed of cheerful and healthy warriors reached the Kingdom of Kaikeya.