Hearing those tidings, Rama with his brothers rejoiced and he uttered these memorable words in their presence:—
"Your two youthful sons, Angada and Candraketu, are worthy to reign, O Saumitri, for they are strong and energetic; I shall install them both as kings! Come, find these two valiant Ones a pleasant region which is not confined, where there is no danger of treachery from hostile monarchs, where they may live at ease and where the ascetics' retreats are not despoiled! O Friend, seek out such a country without causing injury to any!"
Thus spoke Rama, and Bharata answered:—
"There is a charming and healthy region named Karupatta; let two cities that are salubrious and beautiful be established there for the magnanimous Angada and Candraketu which shall be called Angadiya and Candrakanta."
These words of Bharata were approved by Raghava, and he brought that country under his rule and established Angada therein. The City of Angadiya was built for Angada by Rama of imperishable deeds and it was splendid and well fortified. As for Candraketu, who was a giant, his uncle built Candrakanta for him in the country of the Mallas, and that capital was celestial and equal to Amaravati.
Thereafter, greatly delighted, Rama, Lakshmana and Bharata, those invincible warriors, attended the installation of those two youthful princes who, having received the divine unction, fixed in their duty, divided the territory, and Angada had the western and Candraketu the northern region. Angada was accompanied by Sumitra's son [i.e., Shatrughna], whilst Lakshmana and Bharata followed in Candraketu's train.
His sons being firmly established on the throne, Lakshmana took the road back to Ayodhya, having sojourned in Angadiya for a year. On his side, Bharata remained with Candraketu one year more, thereafter returning to Ayodhya to take up his place again at Rama's feet.
Both Saumitri and Bharata, in their love for him and their extreme piety, forgot that rime was passing and thus ten thousand years went by while they devoted themselves to affairs of state. Employing their days in this wise, their hearts satisfied, surrounded with splendour, dwelling together in that righteous city, they resembled the Three Fires whose flames are fed with abundant libations amidst great solemnity.