After a long time, Death, in the form of an ascetic, presented himself at the gates of the great and virtuous Rama and said:—
"I am a messenger from an all-powerful Maharishi and have come to see Rama on a matter of great importance."
Hearing these words, Saumitri hastened to announce the arrival of the ascetic to Rama, saying:—
"Mayest you extend your dominion over both worlds, O Illustrious Prince! A Messenger has come to see you, who, by virtue of his penances, is as radiant as the sun."
Hearing Lakshmana's words, Rama said:—
"Bring in that ascetic of great effulgence, who carries a message from his master, O Dear Brother!"
Then Saumitri answered: "Be it so!" and ushered in that Sage, flaming in splendour, surrounded as it were with burning rays. Approaching the foremost of the Raghus, who shone in his own effulgence, the Rishi, in an harmonious voice, addressed Raghava, saying:—"May felicity be thine!"
Then the supremely illustrious Rama, having paid him the traditional homage and offered him the Arghya, enquired of him concerning his state. Having informed Rama of his wellbeing, the most skilled of orators, that illustrious ascetic seated himself on a golden throne and thereafter Rama said to him:—
"Be you welcome, O Great Sage, what message hast you for me, since you dost come as an ambassador?"
On this enquiry from that Lion among Men, the Sage said to him:—
"If you dost revere the wishes of the Gods, this meeting must take place between us alone; whoever shall overhear us should be put to death by you; the words of the Lord of the Ascetics are secret and should be revered by You."
"Be it so I" replied Rama, and having given this assurance, he issued the following command to Lakshmana:—
"Do you stand at the door, O Long-armed Warrior and dismiss the door-keeper. It is for me to slay whoever hears the converse between this Muni and myself, for it must take place between us alone."
Having sent Lakshmana to guard the door, Kakutstha, born of Raghu, said:—
"O Ascetic, you canst now disclose that with which you have been charged, speak without fear, I shall treasure it in my heart!"