"Learn, O Magnanimous Sovereign, that this is the purpose of my coming! It is the blessed Grandsire who has sent me, O Mighty Prince. I was his son in a former existence, O Conqueror of Hostile Citadels! Born of Maya, O Hero, I am Death who destroys all!
The Grandsire, Lord of the Worlds, speaks thus to you:—
"'Your task is accomplished, O Friend, O Protector of the Worlds! Having formerly destroyed all beings by the aid of Maya, lying amidst the waters of the vast ocean, you didst give me birth. You had already created the Serpent of large coils, Ananta, as also two mighty Beings, Madhu and Kaitabha, whose crushed bones covered the earth which appeared at that time with its chain of mountains. From a celestial lotus, bright as the sun, that issued from your navel, you didst produce me and give me the task of creating the world. Since you have charged me with this burden, I lean on you for support, O Lord of the Earth 1 Do you watch over all beings, for it is you who art my strength. By virtue of thine invincible and eternal nature, you should afford protection to all creation, for you have assumed the form of Vishnu! O Mighty Son of Aditi, you didst enhance the power of your brothers and when they sought to accomplish their tasks, you didst come to their aid. When, O Prince, all creatures were being exterminated by Ravana, you, desiring to slay him, bethought thyself of men. Then you didst resolve to dwell among them in person for eleven thousand years and thereafter return to us. You, who art mind-born, hast completed your stay among mortals; it is the hour, O Foremost of Men, to return to us; if it is your desire to prolong your sojourn among creatures, O Great King, do so and be happy!'
"Such are the words of the Grandsire:—
'If you preferest to enter into possession of the world of the Gods once more, O Raghava, they with their leaders will be freed from all anxiety, since Vishnu will be amongst them.'"
Having heard the words of the Grandsire, which Death communicated to him, Raghava, smiling, answered the Destroyer of the Worlds, saying:—
"These wholly admirable words of that God of Gods assuredly causes me supreme delight, as also your coming hither. I came for the good of the worlds, this is the purpose of my being; mayest you be happy! Thine advent here has moved my heart; I shall leave without delay. The Grandsire has uttered what is true, I must attend to all that concerns the Gods under my dominion, O Destroyer of the Universe!"