As the two were conversing thus, Durvasa, that blessed Sage, who wished to see Rama, came to the gate of the palace and, approaching Saumitri, that illustrious ascetic said:—
"Bring me straightway into Rama's presence, the affair is urgent!"
So spoke the magnanimous Sage, and Lakshmana, the Slayer of His Foes, bowing low, said to him:—
"What is this matter? Explain thyself, O Blessed Sage! What can I do for you? Raghava is occupied, O Brahmin, have patience awhile!"
Hearing this reply from that lion among men, the great Rishi, highly incensed, said to Lakshmana, whom he seemed to consume with his glance:—
"Announce my presence here to Rama immediately, O Saumitri, or I shall pronounce a curse on the kingdom, on you, the city, on Raghava, Bharata and on your House! O Saumitri, I can no longer contain mine indignation!"
Having heard the mighty ascetic's alarming words, Lakshmana pondered awhile within himself concerning their significance, and reflected:—
"It were better that I should perish than all others be destroyed!"
On this, he made the arrival of the ascetic known to Raghava and, Rama hearing the tidings, took leave of Death and, in all haste, sought out the son of Atri. Having paid obeisance with joined palms to that great Sage flaming in effulgence, he enquired of him, saying:—
"What may I do for you?"
On this enquiry from that King of Ascetics, the Sage Durvasa answered:—
"O Virtuous Rama, hear me, this day I have concluded a fast of a thousand years. O Irreproachable Raghava, now give me what you have ready to eat!"
At these words, the King Raghava, with a delighted heart, offered the foremost of Sages dishes, that had been made ready, and that ascetic, having partaken of that food like unto Amrita, addressed Rama, saying:—
"It is well!" and returned to his hermitage.
Thereafter Rama called to mind the words of Death at that portentous meeting and, with bowed head, his heart wrung with anguish, he was unable to speak. Reflecting again and again within himself, the illustrious Raghava thought, "All is lost!" and fell silent.