Seeing Rama, his head bowed, afflicted and like unto the moon in eclipse, Lakshmana spoke to him in cheerful and affectionate tones, saying:—
"You should not grieve on mine account, O Long-armed Warrior; thus was it already ordained and has its roots in a past cause! Slay me without hesitation, be faithful to your vow! Those who do not honour their promise, go to hell! If you have any affection for me, O Great King, and dost find any merit in me, then slay me and fulfil the law, O Raghava!"
Thus spoke Lakshmana, and Rama, his mind troubled, called his ministers and priests together and told them what had taken place, of the arrival of Durvasa and the vow he had made to the Ascetic. When they had heard these things, the ministers and brahmins became silent, nevertheless the illustrious Vasishtha spoke thus:—
"O Long-armed Prince, I perceive that the separation from Lakshmana is for you a calamity, causing your hair to stand on end. O Illustrious Rama, do you abandon him; death is powerful, let not your words prove false. When a promise is not honoured and virtue is destroyed, undoubtedly the Three Worlds with all animate and inanimate beings, with the hosts of the Gods and Rishis, perish! Therefore, O Lion among Men, in order to save the Three Worlds and assure the continuance of the universe, banish Lakshmana!"
Hearing these words, which were in accord with duty and righteousness, approved by all, Rama, in the midst of the assembly, said to Lakshmana:—
"Lest righteousness should perish, I banish you, O Saumitri, a sentence of banishment or death is the same to men of honour!"
At this decree of Rama's, Lakshmana, weeping, his mind distracted, departed in all haste without returning to his home.
Having reached the banks of the Sarayu River, he performed his ablutions and, with joined palms, closing the doors of the senses, he began to meditate. As he was thus restraining his senses, he did not release his breath while given up to contemplation, and the Gods with their leaders, the troops of Apsaras and companies of Rishis covered him with a rain of flowers. Becoming invisible to men, the mighty Lakshmana was borne away in the body by Shakra, who carried him to the Celestial Region. Beholding the fourth part of Vishnu entering heaven, the foremost of the Gods, delighted, joyfully and unitedly offered homage to that descendant of Raghu.