Having banished Lakshmana, Rama, a prey to grief and desolation, said to his priests, ministers and citizens:—
"To-day I shall give the royal annointing to the valiant Bharata, who is faithful to his duty, and make him Lord of Ayodhya; thereafter I shall go to the forest. Make all preparations, lose no time, for to-day I too shall follow the path that Lakshmana has taken!"
Thus spoke Raghava and his subjects bowed low as if deprived of all strength. On his side, Bharata, beside himself on hearing his brother's speech, refused the crown and expressed himself thus:—
"I swear in truth, O King, without you I do not wish to reign, even in Svarga, O You, the Joy of the Raghus! Establish your two sons, the valiant Kusha and Lava in the Southern Koshalas and the Northern Regions; send swift messengers to Shatrughna to announce our departure, let there be no delay!"
Hearing these words of Bharata and also beholding the citizens who, their heads bowed, were overwhelmed with grief, Vasishtha spoke:—
"O Beloved Rama, see how these people are prostrating themselves, having learnt what they desire, fulfill it, do not grieve them I"
Thus spoke Vasishtha and Kakutstha, having caused them to rise, said to the people, "What is asked of me?" and they all said to him:—
"If you are leaving us, let us accompany you wheresoever you goest, O Rama; if you dost love your subjects and that affection is unsurpassed, let us, with our sons and wives, follow the righteous path with you; whether it be to an inaccessible retreat, river or ocean, you should not abandon us; lead us all wherever you will, O You our Master I This is our supreme desire, our most cherished wish; it will always be the delight of our hearts to accompany you, O Prince!"
Recognizing his people's profound attachment, Rama answered, "So be it!" and occupied himself in carrying through what he had undertaken that day.
He gave over the Southern Koshalas to the valiant Kusha and those of the north to Lava; thereafter, placing those two princes on his lap, he enthroned them in Ayodhya and bestowed upon them thousands of chariots and numberless elephants with ten thousand horses. Having furnished them with jewels and treasure in abundance and given them cheerful and healthy people to attend upon them, he sent the two brothers, Kusha and Lava, each to his own capital.
Those two heroes being installed in their respective cities, Rama sent out an emissary to the magnanimous Shatrughna.