The messengers, urged on by Rama's command, swiftly and promptly went to Madhura without halting on the way. After three nights they reached that city where they all informed Shatrughna what had happened; the banishing of Lakshmana, Raghava's vow, the installation of his two sons and the resolution of his subjects to follow him; how an enchanting city had been built for Kusha under the name of Kushavati on the high ridge of the Vindhya Mountains by the virtuous Rama, and that Shravasti was the name of the ravishing and famous capital of Lava; they told him also of the preparations made by Raghava and Bharata to take all the people from Ayodhya and enter Svarga.
Having related all these things to the magnanimous Shatrughna, the messengers became silent and thereafter added, "Make all haste, O King!"
Hearing these fearful tidings regarding the imminent destruction of his entire House, Shatrughna, the Joy of Raghu, called his people together and summoned his family priest, Kancana, in order to impart the truth to them of his immediate departure with his brothers.
Thereafter, that valiant prince installed his two sons, having distributed abundant wealth equally amongst them, and Subahu was established in Madhura and Shatrughatin in Vaidisha. This being accomplished, that descendant of Raghu left for Ayodhya in a single chariot.
There he beheld the magnanimous Rama like unto a flaming brazier, clothed in a robe of fine wool, in the midst of the imperishable Sages. Paying obeisance to them with joined palms, his senses under control, he addressed his virtuous brother, whose thought too was ever fixed on his duty, and said:—
"I have enthroned my two sons, O King, and have come hither; know well that I am resolved to follow you! Do not oppose me, O Valiant One, for I would not that your will should be disregarded by one like me."
Seeing his resolve was fixed, Rama said to Shatrughna, "So be it."
Having ceased from speaking, the monkeys, who were able to change their form at will, with the companies of bears and titans came there from all directions with Sugriva at their head, all being united in their desire to behold Rama, who stood with his face turned towards the sky.
Devas, Rishis and Gandharvas with their offspring, hearing of Rama's intended departure, had all assembled, saying:—
"We have come here to follow you, O Prince! T o leave without us, O Rama is to strike us down with the Rod of Death."
At that instant, the supremely powerful Sugriva, bowing before that hero in accord with tradition, addressed him with humility and said:—
"Having installed the virtuous Angada, O Prince, know that I have come hither with the intention of accompanying you!"
At these words, the illustrious Kakutstha smiling, answered:—
"So be it 1" Thereafter he said to Bibishana, the King of the Rakshasas:—
"As long as people exist, O Mighty Lord of the Rakshasas, do you remain in Lanka. As long as the moon and sun continue to shine on the earth, as long as they speak of me in the world, so long shall thine empire endure; this is the will of your friend, do you obey! Govern your people according to justice and do not question this further. One thing more I wish to say to you, O Mighty Monarch of the Rakshasas, do you worship the Divinity of the House of Ikshvaku, the Guide of the Universe, Shri Jagannath, whom the Devas themselves with their leaders perpetually adore."
"So shall it be," answered Bibishana, and Kakutstha thereafter addressed Hanuman, saying:—
"Resign thyself to continuing to live, do not render my will void. As long as my story is told in the world, O Foremost of Monkeys, so long mayest you be happy and remember my words!"
Thereupon Hanuman, acquiescing in Rama's utterance, in his delight, said:—
"As long as your purifying history is circulated in the world, so long O Rama, shall I remain on earth submissive to your will!"
Then Raghava issued the same command to Jambavan and said:—
"Till the Kali Yuga begins, continue to dwell on earth!"
Thereafter, addressing all the other bears and monkeys, he said:—
"If it be your desire, then follow me!"