When the dawn broke, the broad-chested and illustrious Rama, whose eyes were as large as lotus petals, said to his spiritual Preceptor
"Let the Agnihotra burning brightly with the Twice-born and also the sacrificial canopy be borne in advance and you, My Lord, precede them on this great journey."
Thereupon Vasishtha, full of majesty, performed the prescribed rituals related to the Mahaprasthana without omitting anything. Then Rama, clothed in fine silk, invoking Brahma and reciting the Vedic Mantras, taking Kusha Grass in both his hands, set out for the Sarayu River, halting from time to time, silently making his way along the rough path, Radiant as the sun, he issued from his palace barefooted and, on his right, walked Shri Lakshmi with her lotus, on his left, was the great Goddess Vyavasaya [i.e., The Goddess of the Earth] and, assuming human form, his innumerable arrows, marvellous bow and all the other weapons accompanied him. The Vedas, in the persons of brahmins, the Holy Gayatri, Protector of the World, the sacred syllable "aum" and the invocation "Vashat" followed in Rama's train as also the great-souled Rishis, and all the Deities of the Earth accompanied that hero to the open gates of heaven.
In his steps trod the women of the inner apartments with the aged, the children, servants, eunuchs and personal attendants. The faithful Bharata with his wives accompanied by Shatrughna followed in Rama's train, attended by the sacrificial fire. All the magnanimous Sages with the ritualistic articles, having assembled there with their sons and wives, joined the procession of the virtuous Kakutstha. Ministers, groups of servants with their offspring, their kinsmen and their flocks joyfully followed in the footsteps of their master. All the citizens, happy and healthy people, distinguished by their good qualities, joined Raghava's departure and all the men and women with their birds, beasts and friends, purified of their sins, went forward cheerfully. Devoted to Rama, the Monkeys, having bathed, delighted and satisfied, cried out exultantly with all their strength, "Kilakila!"
In that multitude, none was sad, downcast or unhappy, but a universal felicity filled all to the highest degree. In their desire to behold Rama taking his departure, the people of the country, through which he passed, on seeing him, took their places in his train. Bears, monkeys, titans, citizens, with deep devotion, followed him in the utmost serenity. Even the invisible Beings of the city joined Raghava's procession when he went to heaven. Beholding him, all creatures, animate and inanimate, lovingly accompanied him on that journey. Not a single being, not even the least of them, was to be seen in Ayodhya; even those born of animals followed in Rama's wake.