Then Rama enquired of the Muni:—How did those highly powerful brothers practice penance, O Brahmana, and of what nature was it?
Then Agastya of tranquil mind answered Rama and said:—
Various were the pious observances of each of them; Kumbhakarna too, putting forth all his strength, constantly pursued the path of duty. In the heat of summer he stood amidst five fires and, in the rainy season, he took up the Vira posture, whilst in the winter season he remained plunged in water.
Thus two thousand years passed during which he applied himself to piety and remained on the righteous path.
On his side, Bibishana, who was virtue itself, intent on duty and of pure soul, stood on one leg for five thousand years. This penance accomplished, troops of Apsaras danced and a rain of flowers fell, whilst the Gods hymned his praises. During another five thousand years, he stood facing the sun, his head and arms raised, his mind fixed in contemplation of the Veda. In this wise, Bibishana, like an inhabitant of heaven in the Nandana Gardens, dwelt for ten thousand years. And Dashagriva deprived himself of nourishment for the same period and every thousand years sacrificed one of his heads to the God of Fire. Thus nine thousand years passed and nine of his heads had been sacrificed to Fire; when ten thousand years had gone by, Dashagriva prepared to sever his tenth head when the Grandsire of the World appeared, and He, with the Gods, highly gratified, presented Himself before Ravana and said to him:—
I am pleased with you, what boon shall I confer on you this day? You shalt not have undergone these austerities in vain. O You who art conversant with dharma, speedily choose what boon will most please you; you have found favour with me, O Dashagriva!
Thereupon Dashagriva, delighted, bowing down to that God, answered in a voice trembling with joy:—
O Bhagavat, for living beings there exists no fear like that of death; there is no foe comparable to Mrityu, therefore I choose immortality!
Thus spoke Dashagriva and Brahma answered him saying
It is not possible to grant you immortality, choose some other boon!
At these words of Brahma, the Creator of the World, O Rama, Dashagriva replied with joined palms:—
May I not be slain by Supamas, Nagas, Yakshas, Daityas Danavas, Rakshasas nor by the Gods, O Eternal One, O Lord of Beings. I do not fear other creatures, who, with men, I look upon as mere straws, O You who art adored by the Celestials.
Thus spoke the Rakshasa Dasaratha, and the Lord, the Grandsire of the Worlds, who was accompanied by the Gods, said to him
It shall be as you desirest, O Foremost of the Rakshasas!
Then, having answered Dashagriva thus, O Rama, the Grandsire added:—
Hear what great favour I shall grant you further in my satisfaction. The heads that formerly were sacrificed by you into the fire, O Irreproachable One, will now grow again as they were before and, O Rakshasa, I will finally confer another boon on you that is hard to obtain, O My Friend, you shalt be able to assume any form you desirest at will.
As soon as the Grandsire had spoken thus, the heads of the Rakshasa Dashagriva, that had been consumed by fire, grew again.
O Rama, having spoken thus to Dashagriva, the Grandsire of the Worlds said to Bibishana:—
O My Dear Bibishana, you whose intellect is fixed on virtue, I am gratified with you, choose a boon, O Righteous and Pious One.
Then the pure-souled Bibishana, who radiated good qualities as the moon her beams, spoke with joined palms, saying:—
O Bhagavat, I have endeavoured to do that which I ought to do. You are the Guru of the World; if, in your satisfaction, you dost accord me a boon, then hear me; O Blessed Lord. May my soul ever be fixed in righteousness in the midst of the greatest adversity. Without being instructed, may I be able to use the Brahma Weapon. May whatever thoughts come to me, wherever or in whatever state I find myself, always conform to virtue and may I fulfil my duty! O Most Exalted of Beings, these are the boons I consider to be the most precious; for those who follow dharma nothing is impossible!
Then Prajapati, full of joy, again addressed Bibishana saying
O Most Virtuous and Dear Child, let it be as you sayest, though you wast born in the Rakshasa Race, O Slayer of Your Foes, no evil ever enters your heart! I grant you immortality!
Having uttered these words, as Prajapati was preparing to accord a boon to Kumbhakarna, all the Gods, with joined palms, addressed him thus:—
As for Kumbhakarna, do not grant him any boons! You knowest well how the Three Worlds fear this perverse wretch! In the Nandana Gardens, seven Apsaras and ten servants of Mahendra were devoured by him, O Brahma, as also Rishis and men. Such are the deeds of this Rakshasa before receiving a boon; if one is conferred on him, he may consume the Three Worlds 1 O You whose splendour is immeasurable, feigning to grant him a boon cause him to become bemused; in this way, the worlds will live in peace and he will receive his just deserts.
Thus did the Gods speak, and Brahma, born of the lotus, thought on the Goddess, his consort, and, as soon as he called her to mind, Sarasvati appeared at his side and, with joined palms said to him:—
O Lord, I am here, what shall I do?
Then Prajapati answered that Goddess, who had come there, saying:—
O You who art Speech, be you in the mouth of that Indra among the Rakshasas and utter that which the Gods desire.
So be it! she answered and,having entered his mouth, Kumbhakama said:—
To sleep for innumerable years, O Lord of Lords, this is my desire!
May it be so! answered Brahma and, with the Gods, he departed.
The Goddess Sarasvati then left the Rakshasa, while Brahma, with the Gods ascended to the heavenly region.
When Sarasvati had departed, Kumbhakarna came to himself and that perverse wretch, in his misfortune, reflected:—
How can such words have passed my lips? I must have been bemused by the Gods who came hither.
Having received those various boons, the three brothers of flaming energy, returned to the Sleshmataka Forest where they dwelt happily.