Sumali, having learnt of the boons that the rangers of the night had received, abandoning his fear, emerged from the nether regions, and the companions of that Rakshasa, Marica, Prahasta, Virupaksha and Mahodara rushed out also fiill of fury.
Thereafter Sumali with his friends, surrounded by the foremost of the Rakshasas, sought out Dashagriva and, embracing him, said:—
By the grace of heaven, O Dear Child, the desire of my heart has been fulfilled since you have received these excellent boons from the Lord of the Three Worlds. The great fear that forced us to abandon Lanka in order to take refuge in Rasatala, into which we were precipitated by Vishnu, has now been dissipated! Many and many a time, under the threat of that terror, we abandoned our retreat but, being pursued, together we plunged into hell. Your brother, that crafty Lord of Wealth, took possession of the City of Lanka, the abode of the Rakshasas. If it be possible by conciliation, gifts or force, to regain the possession of it, then do so, 0 Irreproachable Hero! You wflt then become the sovereign of Lanka and, by your grace, the Rakshasa Race, that has been disestablished, will be reinstated; thereafter you will reign over us all, O Lord.
Then Dashagriva answered his maternal grandfather who stood near and said
The Lord of Wealth is mine elder brother; it is not fitting that you should speak thus.
Quietly rebuked in this wise by that Indra of the Rakshasas, the most powerful of them all, Sumali, being aware of his intentions, did not insist further.
Some time later, as Ravana continued to reside in that place, Prahasta addressed these significant words to him:—
O Valiant Dashagriva, such a speech is not worthy of you; brotherly love is not the concern of heroes! Hear me 1 There were two sisters who loved each other and who were supremely fair; they were wedded to that Lord of Creatures, the Prajapati Kashyapa, and with him Aditi begot the Gods, those Lords of the Three Worlds, whilst Diti begot the Daityas. To the Daityas, those virtuous heroes, the earth, with its mountains, surrounded by the ocean, formerly belonged. They waxed exceedingly strong, nevertheless they were slain in war by the mighty Vishnu, who gave over the imperishable Triple World to the Gods. You are therefore not the only one to act in opposition to a brother, which was done by the Gods and Asuras. Follow my counsel therefore!
Dashagriva, hearing these words was filled with joy and, having reflected a moment, he said, It is well! and, in his delight, that same day the valiant Dashagriva with his rangers of the night repaired to the wood bordering on Lanka. Stationed on the Trikuta Mountain, that ranger of the night sent out Prahasta, who was skilled in speech, as his ambassador, and said to him:—
Go speedily, O Prahasta, and speak to the foremost of the Nairritas, addressing him in conciliatory words, saying:—
This City of Lanka, O King, belongs to the magnanimous Rakshasas! O My Friend, you didst take possession of it; it is not just, O You who art beyond reproach! If you dost restore it to us now, O Hero of unrivalled exploits, I shall be gratified and justice will have been maintained.
Then Prahasta repaired to the City of Lanka, whose strong support was Dhanada, and addressed that Lord of Wealth of illustrious lineage in the following words:—
I have been deputed by your brother Dashagriva, who is near at hand, that long-armed hero who is pious and the foremost of
warriors, to come hither and my words are those of Dashanana, O Lord of Wealth 1
This ravishing city, O Large-eyed Hero, was formerly held by the Rakshasas of terrible exploits, whose chief was Sumali. It is on this account, dear son of Vishravas, that Dashagriva asks you to restore it to them; this request is made in all friendliness.
Having heard Prahasta, Vaishravana replied in words worthy of one who is skilled in speech and said:—
Lanka was bestowed on me by my sire when it had been abandoned by the rangers of the night; I have peopled it by inducements of gifts, honours and every kind of privilege. Now go and bring this answer to Dashagriva—The city and the kingdom under my dominion are thine also, O Long-armed Hero, enjoy this realm without restriction; share this dominion and its riches with me without division.
Having spoken thus, that Lord of Wealth went to visit his sire and paying obeisance to him related the nature of Ravanas request, saying:—
O My Father, Dashagriva has sent a messenger to me, saying, Give up the City of Lanka that was formerly occupied by the Rakshasa Race. What shall I do now, O Blessed One, tell me?
On this enquiry, the Brahmarishi Vishravas, foremost of the ascetics, said to Dhanada who stood before him with joined palms:—
Hear me, O My Son, the long-armed Dashagriva has spoken of this matter in my presence and I have often rebuked him; he is exceedingly wicked and, in my wrath, I said to him You will be destroyed; it were better for you to listen to my words which are fraught with reason and integrity. He is perverse however, and the boons he has received have so intoxicated him that he can no longer discriminate between what is just and unjust. It is on account of my curse that he has fallen into this lamentable condition. Do you therefore retire to Mount Kailasha, that support of the earth, O Long-armed Hero, and leave Lanka with your followers at once. In that place the enchanting Mandakini, the most excellent of rivers flows, whose waters are covered with golden lotuses radiant as the sun, and Kumuda, Utpala and other varieties of water-lilies of sweet fragrance. Devas, Gandharvas, Apsaras, Uragas and Kinneras sojourn there, constantly disporting themselves. It is not fitting, O Dhanada, that you should enter into combat with that Rakshasa, for you are conversant with the special boons he has received.
Hearing this reply and obedient to the counsel of his venerable sire, Dhanada left Lanka with his consort, his sons, his ministers, his vehicles and his wealth.
Meantime Prahasta had sought out the mighty Dashagriva and, with a joyous heart, said to him in the midst of his counsellors:—
The City of Lanka is now free, Dhanada has abandoned it and has departed. Do you establish thyself therein so that, with us, you canst fulfil your duty.
Thus did Prahasta speak, and the all-powerful Dashagriva invaded Lanka with his brothers, his army and his court. As the Gods enter heaven, so did that enemy of the Celestials enter that city that Dhanada had just deserted and which was divided by well-planned highways. Enthroned by the rangers of the night, Dashanana installed himself in that city, which was filled with Rakshasas resembling dark clouds.
The Lord of Wealth, however, in reverence for his fathers words, built a city on Mount Kailasha which was immaculate as the moon, adorned with splendid palaces sumptuously decorated, as Purandara constructed Amaravati.