The foremost of the Rakshasas, having been anointed king, with his brother began to consider giving his sister in marriage. He therefore gave that Rakshasi to the King of the Kalakas and the Lord of the Danavas himself presented Shurpanakha, his sister, to Vidyujjihva.
This being accomplished, that night-ranger left for the chase and thereafter he beheld the son of Diti, Maya, O Rama.
Seeing him accompanied by a young girl, that Rakshasa, Dashagriva said to him:—
Who art you wandering in the forest that is devoid of man or beast? How is it that you are in the company of this youthful maiden whose eyes resemble a does?
O Rama, to this question, put to him by that ranger of the night, Maya replied, saying:—
Hear me and I will tell you the truth! There was a nymph named Hema of whom you have already heard. The Gods bestowed her on me, as Pauloma was given to Shatakratu. Full of love for her, I passed centuries at her side when she was taken from me by the Gods. Thirteen years passed and in the fourteenth, I built a golden city which I decorated with diamonds and emeralds by the aid of my magic powers. There I dwelt, deprived of Hema, sad, dejected and extremely wretched. Thereafter, taking my daughter with me, I left that city in order to retire to the forest. This is my child, O King, who was brought up in Hemas lap and here I am seeking a husband for her. A daughter is a great calamity, at least for all those who have regard to her honour. In truth, she is a source of anxiety to the family of her father and that of her mother.
Two sons were also born to me by my wife; the first was Mayavi, O Dear Friend, and Dundubhi followed immediately. I have told you the whole truth in accordance with your wish 1 And now, My Dear Son, I would know something of you, who art you?
At these words the Rakshasa answered respectfully:—
I am of Paulastyas race and my name is Dashagriva, my father was the Sage Vishravas, who was the third son of Brahma.
On hearing these words of that Indra among the Rakshasas, O Rama, indicating that he was the son of a great Sage, Maya, the foremost of the Danavas wished to give his daughter to him. Taking her hand in his, Maya addressed that King of the Rakshasas, saying:—
O King, this child, whose mother was the nymph Hema, the youthful Mandodari, for such is her name, do you accept as your consort.
Let it be so! answered Dashagriva, whereupon igniting a fire there, he took her hand in his, O Rama. Maya was conversant with the curse that Dashagrivas sire, that treasury of asceticism had pronounced, nevertheless he bestowed his daughter in marriage on him, knowing him to be the offspring of the Grandsire of the World. At the same time, he gave him a marvellous spear which he had obtained through his supreme penances. It was with this weapon that Ravana wounded Lakshmana. Then, having brought about this marriage, the Lord of Lanka returned to that city.
There, with their consent, he chose two wives for his two brothers; the daughter of Virocana, named Vajravala, was given by him to Kumbhakama, and Bibishana received as wife the virtuous Sarama, the daughter of the King of the Gandharvas, the magnanimous Shailusha, and she had been born on the shores of the Lake Manasa.
At that time in the rainy season, the waters of the Manasa Lake were swollen and the mother of the girl cried out affectionately, Do not overflow, O Lake! Thereafter the girl was called Sarama.
These alliances having been concluded, the Rakshasas gave themselves up to pleasure, each with his own coflsort, as the Gandharvas in the Nandana Gardens.
And Mandodari gave birth to a child with the voice of a thunder-doud, he who is known to you as Indrajita. Scarcely had he been born than that son of Ravana began to roar with a terrible voice, like unto thunder, and the city was deafened, O Raghava. His father therefore called him Meghanada; and he grew up in the magnificent private apartments, hidden in the lap of the foremost of women, as a fire is concealed under shavings; and that son of Ravana filled his mother and father with joy.