Some time later, the Lord of the Worlds sent Nidra [i.e., The Personification of Sleep] to Kumbhakarna in the form of overpowering sleep and Kumbhakarna said to his brother, who was present:—
O King, sleep holds me in thrall, prepare a refuge for me.
Therefore the king selected some artisans, like unto Vish-vakarma, who constructed a splendid dwelling for Kumbhakarna, a league in expanse and two in length which was exceedingly sumptuous and secluded. On every side, it was decorated with columns of crystal encrusted with gold; the stairways were made of emerald with rows of small bells hanging from the carved ivory galleries, the floors being of diamond and crystal.
All should have been constantly and wholly happy in that place, which was enchanting and luxurious in every way, and which was built by the Rakshasas and resembled a sacred cave in the Meru Mountain. It was there, overcome by slumber, that the mighty Kumbhakarna rested innumerable years without waking.
Whilst his brother, the mighty Kumbhakarna, overcome by Nidra, slept for thousands of years without waking, Dashanana, of unbridled passions, harassed the Devas, Rishis, Yakshas and Gandharvas and overran their beautiful parks and groves like a madman, laying them waste; and that Rakshasa churned up the rivers, like an elephant disporting itself, agitating the trees like a violent tempest and striking the hills as if by lightning.
Hearing of Dashagrivas exploits, the virtuous Lord of Wealth, reflecting that he was his own brother, for the honour of his race and desirous of manifesting fraternal affection, sent a messenger to Lanka in Dashagrivas interests.
Then the messenger, entering the city, approached Bibishana who received him with honour and enquired concerning his visit. After asking about the welfare of Dhanadaand his kinsfolk, Bibishana brought him to Dashanana in the assembly hall where he was resting.
Beholding the king blazing in his own effulgence, the messenger said:—Hail to you, O King and having paid obeisance with these words, stood silent awhile. At that time Dashagriva was reclining on a sumptuous couch adorned with rich coverings whereupon the messenger addressed him saying:—
O King, I bring you the words uttered by your brother in their entirety—Between us two, equality of conduct should exist as among others of our race. A truce to these evil deeds! From now on comport thyself in a seemly manner and, if possible, take righteousness as your guide! I have seen the Nandana Gardens laid waste and, it is said, that the Rishis have been persecuted; the measures that the Gods are taking against you are known to me. I have been disregarded by you on countless occasions, but even if a youthful person err, he should be protected by his relatives.
Having repaired to the Himavat Plateau to practice dharma and subjugate my senses, I forced myself to undergo penance in order to gratify the Lord Mahadeva; there I beheld that divine God accompanied by Uma and a glance from my left eye fell on the Goddess 1 Who is this woman? I asked myself, desiring this knowledge and for no other reason, for Rudrani had assumed an unparalleled form. Then the Goddess, by her celestial power, consumed my left eye, which grew yellow and the light became obscured as if by dust.
Thereupon I repaired to another vast mountain plateau and remained there eight hundred years observing silence.
Having completed that penance, the God Maheshwara came to me and, highly gratified, said:—
I am satisfied with thine austerities O Virtuous and Saintly Ascetic. This vow has been fulfilled by me and by you, O Lord of Rishis; noneother could have observed a similar mortification. These practices are extremely rigid and I myself formerly followed them also. Grant me your friendship therefore, O Sinless One, you have conquered me and your penance has been fruitful. As the Goddess, whose form you didst look upon, burnt up your left eye, turning it yellow, you shaft be named Ekakshipingali [i.e., yellow-eyed].
Having thus contracted a friendship with Shankara, I took leave of him and, on my return, learnt of thine evil conduct. Abandon this impious course that will bring dishonour on our race. The Gods with the hosts of Rishis are considering how they may destroy you.
Hearing these words, Dashagriva, his eyes red with anger, clenching his fists and teeth, answered him thus:—
O Messenger, I knew what you wast about to utter! Neither art you my brother nor is he who sent you; for the Lord of Wealth is not speaking in mine interests! That fool forces me to hear of his friendship with Maheshwara 1 This speech of thine is intolerable. I have borne it till now, for he is mine elder brother and, as such, it is not fitting that I should slay him. Now, hearing thine address, this is my resolve—By the strength of mine arms, I shall conquer the Three Worlds. Solely on his account, I shall dispatch the Four Guardians of the World to the region of Yama!
Having spoken thus, the Lord of Lanka, Ravana, slew the messenger with a single stroke of his sword and gave him to the wicked Rakshasas to devour. Thereafter, ascending his chariot amidst acclamations, in his eagerness to subdue the Three Worlds, he set out to seek the Lord of Wealth.