Seeing the foremost of the Yakshas fleeing in their thousands, the Lord of Wealth said to the powerful Manibhadra:—
O Prince of the Yakshas, slay that wicked Ravana of evil ways and deliver the valiant and heroic Yakshas!
At this command, the long-armed and invincible Manibhadra set out to fight surrounded by four thousand Yakshas and they hurled themselves on the Rakshasas, whom they struck with blows from maces, bars, javelins, lances, swords and clubs. And they entered into a violent struggle, falling on the foe with the swiftness of birds of prey, crying Advance! Advance! Yield! Never! Fight!
Beholding that formidable combat, the Devas, Gandharvas, Rishis and Chanters of the Veda were extremely astonished. A thousand of the Yakshas fell under Prahastas blows in the conflict and that irreproachable Hero Mahodara slew a further thousand, whilst, in his fury, O Prince, Marica, thirsting to fight, slew two thousand of the enemy in the twinkling of an eye.
On their side, the Yakshas fought valiantly but the Rakshasas called upon their powers of magic and thus gained ascendancy in the combat, O Lion among Men. While wrestling with Dhumraksha in the great struggle, Manibhadra received a violent blow in the chest from a pike but remained unmoved, and he, in his turn, struck the Titan Dhumraksha on the head whereupon he fell senseless.
Seeing Dhumraksha wounded and covered with blood, Dashanana hurled himself on Manibhadra in the thick of the fray and, while he was rushing on him in fury, the foremost of theYakshas,Manibhadra,piercedhimwiththreedarts. Wounded, Dashagriva struck a blow at Manibhadras diadem which fell to one side and, from that day, he was known as Parsh-vamauli [i.e., One whose diadem is awry].
Manibhadra, having been put to flight despite his valour, a great clamour arose on the mountain, O King. From afar, the Lord of Wealth, who was armed with a mace and surrounded by Shukra, Prausthapada, Padma and Shakha, beheld Ravana, and, seeing his brother in the field, having lost all dignity, deprived of his glory on account of the curse, the sagacious Kuvera addressed him in words worthy of the House of his Grandsire, saying:—
As despite my warning, you dost not desist, O Perverse Wretch, you shalt recognize the consequences in the future, when you have fallen into hell. He who through heedlessness drinks poison and when he realises it, in his delusion, does not refrain, will know the results of his act in its effects. The Gods do not necessarily approve even dharmic actions, how much less those that bring about such a condition as thine; it is because of this that you are reduced to this state and you dost not appear to be aware of it. He who does not honour his mother, father, a brahmin or a preceptor, will reap the fruit of his fault when he falls under the sway of the Lord of Death. That fool who does not mortify his body will suffer hereafter, when after death he enters the region that his deeds have merited. No wicked man sees his designs fulfilled as he would have wished; as he sows so shall he reap. In this world, prosperity, beauty, power, sons, wealth and prowess are all attained by pious acts. Given over to such iniquitous deeds, you will go to hell. I will not parley with you further; thus should one act in respect of evil-doers!
At these words of Dhanada, which were addressed to Ravanas counsellors led by Marica, they being struck, turned and fled. Dashagriva, however, who had received a blow on the head from the mace of that powerful Lord of the Yakshas, did not move. Thereafter Yaksha and Rakshasa entered into a fierce and prolonged duel, experiencing no fatigue, and Dhanada loosed the Fire-weapon on the Lord of the Titans, who parried it with the Varuna weapon. Then Ravana, having recourse to magic, natural to a Rakshasa, transformed himself in a thousand ways in order to slay his adversary, and that Ten-necked One assumed the form of a tiger, a boar, a cloud, a mountain, an ocean, a tree, a Yaksha and a Daitya. Thus, though wearing many forms, his own remained hidden. Thereafter seizing hold of a mighty weapon, Dashagriva, whirling it round, brought that enormous mace down on the head of Dhanada and the blow knocked the Lord of Wealth senseless, who fell covered with blood, like unto an Ashoka Tree whose roots have been severed.
Then Padma and other Rishis surrounded Dhanada and bore him through the sky to the Nandana Wood.
Having vanquished Dhanada, the foremost of the Rakshasas, with a joyful heart, as a sign of victory, seized the Chariot Pushpaka, that was furnished with golden pillars and doors of emerald, hung with strings of pearls and planted with trees bearing fruit in all seasons; swift as thought, it ranged everywhere at will in its aerial flight. Possessed of golden stairways, encrusted with gems and with floors of refined gold, that indestructible vehicle of the Gods, a perpetual joy to the eyes and heart, that masterpiece created by Vishvakarma at Brahmas command, with its countless ornaments, was indeed a marvel. All that could be desired was to be found therein and it was of a magnificence nothing could surpass; neither too hot nor too cold, it was pleasantly temperate at all seasons.
Ascending that chariot, which he had acquired by his prowess, coursing wheresoever he would, the King Ravana, in his pride and wickedness, deemed himself to have overcome the Three Worlds. Having conquered Vaishravana, he descended from Mount Kailasha and, having by his prowess obtained this great victory, that Ranger of the Night, dazzling in his diadem and necklace of flawless pearls, in his marvellous chariot, blazed like fire.