"As the King of the Rakshasas was ranging the earth, sowing terror amongst its inhabitants, he beheld Narada, that foremost of Munis, riding on a cloud and, having paid obeisance to him and enquired as to his welfare, Dashagriva questioned him concerning his presence there.
Then Narada, the supremely illustrious and celestial Rishi of immeasurable effulgence, stationed on the peak of a cloud, replied to Ravana who stood in the aerial Car Pushpaka, saying:—
"'O King of the Rakshasas, O My Friend, stay a moment! O Son of Vishravas, Offspring of a noble Race, I am gratified by your valiant exploits. Vishnu, overcoming the Daityas, pleased me and you also hast filled me with delight by harassing the Gandharvas and Uragas and exterminating them. I will tell you something that should be known to you if you are willing to hear it! Pay attention to my words, My Dear Son!
"'Why destroy the world, O Dear Child, you whom the Gods cannot slay? This world passes away and is under the power of Mrityu; it is not worthy of you to harass the world of mortals, you who may not be destroyed by Suras, Danavas, Daityas, Yakshas, Gandharvas and Rakshasas. Who would slay creatures who are ever bewildered in respect to their welfare and a prey to great calamities? Who would strike a world such as this which is overcome by age and disease? What wise man would enjoy making war on this world of men amidst a perennial stream of every kind of affliction that visits it on all sides? How can one torment this world which is perishable, smitten by divine forces, hunger, thirst and old age and assailed by misfortune and disappointment?
"'Sometimes, full of joy, men give themselves up to music and dancing, whilst others are crying out in distress, their faces streaming with tears that fall from their eyes. Through attachment to mother, father, children or in affection for their consorts, they rush into ills they know not, then why torment a world already brought low by nescience? Assuredly you have heretofore subdued the world of men, O Dear One! You should undoubtedly descend to Yama's abode; it is Yama whom you should overcome, O Paulastya, O You the penetrator of hostile citadels. When death is subdued, verily the whole universe is subdued.'
"Thus spoke Narada, radiant in his own effulgence, whereupon the Lord of Lanka began to laugh and paying obeisance to him, replied:—
"'O Great Rishi, you who findest felicity in the company of the Gods and Gandharvas and who takest delight in warfare, I am resolved to descend into Rasatala for the purpose of conquest and, having triumphed over the Three Worlds and placed the Serpent Race and the Gods under my yoke, I shall chum up the ocean containing the Nectar of Immortality.'
"Thereafter, the blessed Rishi Narada asked Dashagriva:—
"'Why therefore dost you remain here engaged in another path? Assuredly the way that leads to the City of Yama, the King of the Dead, is extremely hard, O Invincible Hero, O Scourge of your Foes.'
"Thereat, bursting into laughter, like unto the crash of thunder in autumn, Dashanana cried out:—
"'Verily it is accomplished!' Then he added,
'Resolved to slay Vaivasvata, O Great Brahmin, I shall go to the southern region, where that king, born of Surya, dwells. Truly, O Most Blessed One, in mine anger and martial ardour, I swear I shall overcome the four Guardians of the World! Here am I, ready to march against the city of the King of the Pitris. I shall compass the end of Mrityu, he who plunges all beings into mourning.'
"Having spoken thus to the Muni and taken leave of him, Dashagriva went away and entered the southern region accompanied by his ministers.
"Narada however, filled with brahmanic ardour stood awhile plunged in thought and, as he pondered, that Indra among ascetics resembled a smokeless fire.
"He reflected:—
'How can death be overcome, he who afflicts the Three Worlds with their rulers and all animate and inanimate beings, visiting them with just retribution at the termination of their lives? He, the witness of their offerings and sacrifices, like unto a second Pavaka; he, whose power energises the worlds when beings attaining consciousness put forth their activity, and in fear of whom the Three Worlds are disturbed. He before whom the Three Worlds flee in terror, how dare that foremost of Rakshasas stand before him? He who is Vidhatar and Dhatar, the distributor of rewards and punishments in accordance with men's deeds; he the conqueror of the Three Worlds, how can Ravana overcome him? And if he does subdue him, what other order will he establish? Curiosity urges me to descend into Yama's abode in order to witness the duel between Yama and that Rakshasa in person.'"