"The two Rishis having departed, Ravana, the Lord of the Rakshasas, proceeded for forty thousand miles in the upper air, whereupon he reached that excellent higher sphere where swans, endowed with every virtue, dwell. And, having gone on, he ascended yet higher for ten thousand leagues, where on all sides, the clouds, Agneya, Pakshana and Brahma are eternally established. Thereafter, he proceeded to an excellent airy region where the high-souled Siddhas and Caranas ever abide, which is ten thousand leagues in extent.
"O Slayer of your Foes, he then passed to a fourth region, where the Bhutas and Vinayakas perpetually sojourn and thereafter, he went to the fifth aerial realm, which extends over ten thousand leagues, where Ganga, the foremost of rivers is to be found, and the elephants headed by Kumuda, from whose bodies, drops pour down constantly as they sport in the waters, spout forth the sacred stream which they sprinkle in all directions. Here the waters fall down in rain and snow under the rays of the sun, purified by the wind, O Raghava.
"Then that Rakshasa went to the sixth aerial region, O You endowed with great radiance, where Garuda dwells, ever revered by his kinsfolk and friends, and, thereafter, ascended to the seventh aerial region, lying ten thousand leagues higher, where the Seven Rishis dwell. And again proceeding ten thousand leagues higher he reached the eighth aerial region where Ganga, known as the Ganges of the sky, having strong currents, is found in the path of the sun and, who, upheld by air, sends forth a great roaring.
"Now I shall describe the region yet higher than these, where the Moon-god dwells and the extent thereof is eighty thousand leagues. There the Moon encircled by stars and planets, from whom hundreds and thousands of rays stream forth, illumines the world, bringing happiness to all beings.
"Thereupon, beholding Dashagriva, the Moon, blazing up as it were, consumed him with its cold fires and, stricken with fear of those rays, his counsellors were unable to withstand them and Prahasta, uttering the words 'Let victory be thine!' thereafter said:—
"'O King, we are being destroyed by the cold and must leave this place! O Foremost of Monarchs, the icy rays of the moon have the property of fire.'
"Hearing the words of Prahasta, Ravana, beside himself with wrath, lifted his bow, twanging it and began to assail the Moon with Narachas, whereupon Brahma speedily went to that lunar region and said:—
"'O Ten-necked One, O Mighty-armed One, 0 Son of Vishravas, O Gentle One, do you go hence from here speedily; do not oppress the Moon, for that highly effulgent King of the Twice-born desires the well-being of all. I will bestow a mystical formula on you! He who recollects it at the hour of death, does not succumb!'
"Thus addressed, the Ten-necked Rakshasa, with joined palms, said:—
"'O God, if I have found favour with you, then, O Lord of the Worlds, O You of great penances, impart that sacred mantra to me, O You truly Pious One, reciting which, O Great One, I shall be liberated from fear of the Celestials. Verily, by Your favour, O Lord of the Gods, I shall become invincible to all the Asuras, Danavas and Birds.'
"Thus accosted, Brahma said to Dashanana:—
"'O Lord of the Rakshasas, do not repeat this mantra daily but only when your life is in danger. Holding a string of Rud-raksha beads and repeating it, you shalt become invincible; but if you dost not recite it, you shalt not meet with success.
Hear and I shall communicate this sacred formula to you, O Foremost of the Rakshasas, reciting which you shalt obtain victory in the encounter:—
"'Salutations unto You, O God, 0 Lord of Lords, O You worshipped by the Celestials and Asuras. O You, the same in the past, present and future, O Great God, O You having tawny eyes, O You, a boy assuming the form of an aged Being, O You who wearest a tiger skin. O God, You are worthy to be worshipped and art the Lord of the Three Worlds. You are Ishvara, Hara, Haratanemi, the Fire at the end of the World Cycle, Yugantadahaka; You are Baladeva, You are Ganesha, Lokashambu, and Lokapala, You are endowed with huge arms, You are blessed, the Bearer of the Trident; You are possessed of dreadful teeth and jaws, the greatest of the Gods, You are Time, You are Power, You are the Blue-throated and possessed of a huge belly, You are Devantaka, the foremost of the ascetics and the Lord of all creatures. You are the Leader, Protector, Hari-Hara, Destroyer and Preserver, You wearest matted locks, art clean-shaven and wrapped in a loincloth, You are mighty and illustrious, You are the Lord of Spirits and Goblins, the Support of all, Protector of all, Destroyer of all, the Creator and the Eternal Preceptor, You are the Bearer of the Kamandalu, the Wielder of the Pinaka Bow and the Dhurjata. You are worthy of veneration, You are Aum, the highest of all, the First Chanter of the Sama-Veda. You are Death and the nature of death, Pariyatra and the Observer of great vows; You are a brahmacari dwelling in a cave bearing a Vina, Panava and quiver in thine hands; You are immortal, lovely to look upon as the newly risen sun; You dwellest in the crematorium; You are the illustrious Lord of Uma, transcending all taint; You didst pluck out the eyes of Bhagadeva and the teeth of Pusha. You are the overcomer of fever and bearest a noose in Your hand, verily You are Dissolution and Time of the flaming mouth, fire being Your symbol, You are highly effulgent and the Lord of men. You are demented and causest people to tremble; You are the Fourth and deeply venerated of men, You are the Holy Dwarf, Vamanadeva, and the Dwarf who circumambulates the East. You wearest the semblance of a beggar with three locks, and art crafty by nature. You didst stay the hand of Indra and of the Vasus, You are the Seasons, the Creator of seasons; You are Time, Honey and the One of honey eyes. You are the Lord of herbs, a lordly tree bearing fruit and flowers; Your seat is made of arrows; You are ever worshipped by people in all conditions; You are the Creator and Protector of the Universe, the Eternal and true Purusha; You are the Controller of Righteousness, Virupaksha, the Three Dharmas, the Protector of all beings. You are the Three-eyed One of many forms blazing like a million suns, You are the Lord of the Celestials, the foremost of the Gods, bearing matted locks and the crescent moon, You are worthy of being approached and art one with created beings; You are the Player of all musical instruments, ever creating and binding all, and dost bring about the liberation of all beings. You are Pushpadanta, indivisible, the foremost of Destroyers; You have tawny beards, bearest a bow and art fearful and endowed with terrible might.'
"'These hundred and eight sacred and excellent names, uttered by me, destroy all sins, bestow merit and give refuge to those who seek it. O Dashanana, if you dost recite them, you shalt be able to overcome your foes!'"