"Having conferred that favour on Ravana, the Grandsire, sprung from the lotus, speedily went to his own region and Ravana, having obtained the boon, departed.
"After a few days, that Scourge of the Worlds, the Rakshasa Ravana with his counsellors reached the banks of the western ocean and, on an island, a person was seen seated there alone, bright as fire, named Mahajambunada. His form was dreadful like unto the Fire of Dissolution and, beholding that highly powerful Being resembling Mahendra, the Chief of the Gods among the Celestials, or the sun among the planets, a lion among the Sharabhas, Airavata among elephants, Sumeru among mountains and Parijata among trees, Dashagriva said:—
"'Enter into combat with me 1' and his eyes flickered like a cluster of planets [i.e., Grahamala—A cluster of planets or meteors]. Gnashing his teeth, he made a sound like a grinding mill and the highly powerful Dashanana amidst his counsellors, roared aloud. Thereafter with darts, Shads, Rishtis and Pattikas, be assailed that highly effulgent Being of long arms, dread aspect, huge teeth, grim form, conch-like neck, broad chest, frog-like belly, leonine countenance, feet like unto the summit of Mount Kailasha, the palms of his hands and the soles of his feet like unto red lotuses, endowed with the swiftness of thought and the wind, terrifying, bearing a quiver, adorned with bells and chowries, encircled by flames, emitting a sweet sound like a net-work of Kinkinis [i.e., Small bells], wearing a garland of golden flowers round his neck, noble, like unto the Rig-Veda and resembling the Anjana or Golden Mountain.
"As a lion remains unmoved by the attack of a wolf or an elephant, or Mount Sumeru by the King of the Serpents, or the vast ocean by the current of a river, neither was that great Being perturbed, but addressing Dashagriva, said:—
"'O Vicious-minded Night-ranger, I shall soon rid you of your desire for combat.'
"O Rama, the might of that Being was a thousand times greater than Ravana's, which was a source of terror to the worlds. Piety and asceticism, which are the roots of attainment of everything in the world, are in his thighs, desire is in his maleorgan, the Vishvadevas are at his waist and the winds at the side of his intestines; the eight Vasus dwell in his middle, the oceans abide in his belly, the quarters are his hips, the Maruts his joints, the Pittris are at his back and the Grandsire has taken refuge in his heart. Charitable acts of making many gifts of kine, gold and land are the hair in his armpits; the Mountains, Himalaya, Hemakuta, Mandara and Meru are his bones, the thunderbolt is in his palm, the sky in his frame, the evening rain-clouds are on his neck; the Creator and Preserver and the Vidyadharas are his arms; Ananta, Vasuki, Vishalaksha, Iravat, Kamvala, Asvatara, Karkotaka, Dhananjaya, the venomous Takshaka and Utpatakshaka have taken shelter under his nails in order to vomit forth their poison. Fire is in his mouth, the Rudras on his shoulders; the fortnights, months, years and seasons in his jaws, the lunar fortnight and the dark half of the month are his nostrils, the airy currents are the pores of his body, Sarasvati with her Vina is in his throat, the Asvins are in his ears and the sun and moon in his two eyes.
"O Rama, all the branches of the Veda and the sacrifices, the whole galaxy of stars, sweet speech, good deeds, energy and asceticism are supported by his body in human form.
"Then that Purusha struck Ravana playfully with his hands, which were as powerful as lightning and, thus assailed, Ravana fell to the ground immediately and having put that Night-ranger to flight that great Purusha, like unto the Rig-Veda, resembling a mountain be-decked with lotus wreaths, entered the region under the earth.
"Then Ravana addressed his counsellors thus:—
"'O Prahasta, O Shuka, O Sarana and you other ministers, where has that Purusha suddenly gone? Do you tell me!'
"Hearing the words of Ravana, the Night-rangers said:—
'That Purusha, who crushes the pride of Devas and Danavas, has entered into that place!'
"As Garuda swoops on a serpent so did that wicked-minded Ravana speedily approach the entrance of that cave and entered it fearlessly. Penetrating there, he beheld three warriors, dark like unto collyrium, wearing Keyuras [i.e., An ornament used at the waist], adorned with red garlands, besmeared with sandalpaste, bedecked with diverse golden ornaments set with gems; and he saw three crores of exalted beings, fearless, pure, radiant as fire, intent on dancing.
"Beholding them, Dashagriva was not in the least afraid but watched them gyrating whilst he stood at the entrance; and they all resembled the Maha-Purusha, who had previously been seen by him, and all were of similar colour, dress, form and all equally endowed with energy. Then the hair of Dashagriva stood on end as he gazed upon them but, on account of the boon he had received from the Self-born, he issued out of that place alive. Thereafter he saw the Maha Purusha lying on a couch, and his dwelling, his seat and his bed were all white and costly and he slept there enveloped in flames.
"And there, with a fan in her lotus-like hands sat the Goddess Lakshmi, most beautiful in all the Three Worlds and their decoration, as it were; chaste, adorned with celestial garlands, sprinkled with excellent sandal-paste, bedecked with rich ornaments and clad in costly robes. And the wicked Ravana, Lord of the Rakshasas, having entered there without a counsellor, beholding that chaste damsel of sweet smiles, seated on a royal throne, became filled with desire and wished to hold her by the hand, as one under the sway of death fondles a sleeping serpent.
"Beholding that Lord of the Rakshasas with a loosened garment and knowing him desirous of taking hold of her, the huge-armed Deity, sleeping, enveloped in flames, laughed aloud and suddenly by his power began to consume Ravana, the harasser of his foes, who fell down on the earth like an uprooted tree.
Beholding that Rakshasa fallen, the Purusha addressed him saying:—
"'Rise up, O Foremost of the Rakshasas, you shalt not meet with death to-day! You shalt live protected by the Grandsire's boon. Do you therefore go hence without fear, O Ravana, your death is not yet decreed!'
"Regaining consciousness after a while, Ravana was seized with fear and being thus addressed, that enemy of the Gods rose up, his hair standing on end and said to that highly resplendent Deity:—
"'Who art you endowed with great energy and like unto the Fire of Dissolution? Say who art you, O God and from whence hast you come hither?'
"Being thus accosted by the wicked-minded Ravana, the God, smiling, replied in accents as deep as the muttering of clouds, saying:—
"'What hast you to do with me, O Dashagriva, you shalt be slain ere long I'
"Being thus addressed, the Ten-necked Rakshasa, with joined palms, said:—
"'On account of Brahma's boon, I shall not tread the path of death; there is none born amongst men or Gods who can equal me or, in virtue of his prowess, disregard the Grandsire's boon. His words may never prove vain nor can any, howsoever he exert himself, prove them to be false; I do not see any in the Three Worlds who could render his boon to me void. O Great God, I am immortal, I do not fear You and even were I to meet with death, may it be through you and none other, O Lord; death at Your hands will bring me glory and renown!'
"Then Ravana endowed with dreadful prowess saw the Three Worlds with all the animate and inanimate creatures within the body of the Deity. The Adityas, the Maruts, the Sadhyas, the Vasus, the Twin Ashvins, the Rudras, the Pittris, Yama, Kuvera, the seas, mountains, rivers, all the branches of learning and of the Veda, Fire, the planets, the stars, the sky, the Siddhas, Gandharvas, Caranas and the Maha Rishis conversant with the knowledge of the Veda, Garuda, the Nagas, the other Gods, Yakshas, Daityas and Rakshasas were all seen in their subtle forms in the limbs of that Purusha lying there."
On this, the virtuous-souled Rama said to Agastya, the foremost of Munis:—"O Lord, tell me who was that Maha Purusha on that island? Who were those hundreds and thousands of beings? Who is the Purusha who humbles the pride of Daityas and Danavas?"
Hearing Rama's words, Shri Agastya answered
"O You existing eternally, O God of Gods, hearken and I will tell you. That Purusha on the island was the illustrious Kapila and all those who were dancing are the Deities equalling that intelligent Kapila in energy and power. And that Rakshasa, bent on sin, was not looked on by Him with a wrathful glance, therefore he was not immediately reduced to ashes, but Ravana, who resembled a mountain, with his person pierced, fell to the ground. As a crafty man penetrates a secret, so did that Purusha pierce Ravana's person with his arrow-like words.
"Thereafter that Rakshasa of great prowess, having regained his senses after a long time, returned to where his counsellors were."