"Dashagriva, having given over that redoubtable army to Khara and consoled his sister, became master of himself once more and was freed from anxiety.
"Thereafter that powerful Indra among the Rakshasas penetrated into the marvellous Nikumbhila Grove where he beheld hundreds of sacrificial posts and altars and, as if blazing in brilliance, a sacrifice was being performed.
"There, clad in a black antelope skin, holding a coconut loshta and staff, he beheld his own son, Meghanada of dread aspect.
Approaching him, the Lord of Lanka, clasping him in his arms, enquired of him:—
"'What art you doing here, O Child, tell me truly!'
"Then that excellent Twice-born of rigid penances, Ushanas [i.e., Sage Sukra], in order that the sacrifice should prove auspicious, answered Ravana, saying:—
"'I shall tell you myself, O King, listen to all that has taken place. Seven sacrifices with countless preparatory rites have been undertaken by your son, the Agnisthoma, Ashvamedha, Bahus-vamaka, Rajasuya, Gomedha and the Vaishnava and, having engaged in die Maheshvara sacrifice, difficult for men to undertake, your son, on its completion, received gifts from the Lord of Creatures Himself: a stable and celestial chariot coursing at will in the sky, the power of illusion by which darkness is created on the field of battle so that even the Gods and Asuras can no longer find their way, and, in order to exterminate the foe in combat, O King, he has also been granted two inexhaustible quivers, a bow that no weapon can shatter and a powerful arrow. Having received these gifts, your son, O Dashanana, wishes to meet with you on the completion of the sacrifice and will soon present himself before you.'
"Then Dashagriva said:—
"'This is not well done, since our enemy, Indra, has been worshipped with these offerings. However, what is done is done and doubtless you will acquire merit thereby, let us now return, My Friend, and enter our abode.'
"Thereafter Dashagriva with his son and Bibishana returned to his dwelling and caused all the captives, who were crying and sobbing, to be brought down; and the virtuous Bibishana, being aware of his intention regarding those women, who were noble and veritable pearls, the offspring of the Gods, Danavas and Rakshasas, said to his brother:—
'"It is practices such as these, which you dost follow with deliberate intention despite your knowledge of the causes of destruction of beings, that are ruinous to your good name, your family and fortune! After ill-treating their relatives, you have carried away these high-born women, whilst Madhu affronts you by carrying off Kumbhinasi,'
"Then Ravana answered:—'I was not aware of this; who is this Madhu of whom you speakest?' and Bibishana replied to his brother indignantly and said:—
"'Learn the consequences of thine evil karma! The elder brother of our maternal grandfather, Sumali, that virtuous old man named Malyavan, Ranger of the Night, the father of our mother, is the grandfather of Kumbhinasi, so that we are virtually her brothers. She has been borne away by Madhu, a Rakshasa of superior power, while your son was engaged in the sacrifice and I was bathing in the waters. Kumbhakarna, on his side, was still under the influence of sleep. Having slain the aged ministers, that foremost of night-rangers instantly carried away the princess most ruthlessly, though she was in the precincts of the inner apartments. Though these ill-tidings were known to us, we did not slay the ravisher since it is imperative that a young girl be provided with a consort by her brothers. This is the fruit of your perverse and wicked conduct which, as you seest, you are now reaping in this world itself.'
"Hearing these words of Bibishana's, that Indra of the Rakshasas, Ravana, wrought up through die wickedness of his soul, like unto an ocean with surging waves, his eyes red with anger, said:—
"'Let my chariot be harnessed speedily, let my warriors stand ready with my brother Kumbhakarna and the foremost of the rangers of the night in their conveyances heaped with every weapon. To-day, having slain Madhu, who dares to defy Ravana, I shall go to the region of the Gods, burning to fight, surrounded by my companions.'
"Four thousand Akshauhinis of the foremost of the titans, armed from head to foot with various weapons, instantly rushed out, eager for hand to hand encounter, and Indrajita marched in the advance guard with his warriors. Ravana occupied the centre and Kumbhakarna the rearguard. As for the virtuous Bibishana, he remained in Lanka, faithful to his duty. All the other warriors advanced against Madhu's city and they were mounted on mules, buffalo, fiery steeds, porpoises and great serpents, covering the sky and, beholding Ravana on the march, hundreds of Daityas, who were at emnity with the Gods, followed him.
"Meanwhile Dashanana, having reached Madhupura, entered it, yet he did not find Madhu there but his own sister, who, paying obeisance to him, with a deep bow cast herself at his feet, for Kumbhinasi feared the Lord of the Rakshasas.
"Then he, raising her up, said to her:—
"'Do not tremble!' and the King of the Rakshasas added 'What dost you desire of me?' Then she replied:—
'O Long-armed Prince, if I find favour with you, then, 0 Proud Hero, do not slay my lord; it is not fitting to reduce women of nobility to such affliction. Of all ill-fortune, to become a widow is the greatest. Be true to your word, O Indra of Monarchs, and receive my supplication with favour. You have thyself said "You have nothing to fear!"'
"Then Ravana, in cheerful tones, answered his sister, who stood near him, saying:—
'Where is your husband, tell me quickly! I shall go with him to conquer the region of the Gods. I shall not slay Madhu because of my tender affection for you.'
"At these words, Kumbhinasi roused her lord, that Ranger of the Night, who was sleeping profoundly and, in the height of joy, said to him:—
"'My powerful brother, Dashagriva, is here, who desires to vanquish the world of the Gods; he has chosen you as his ally, therefore go, O Titan, with your kinsmen and lend him your strong support. It is fitting that you should assist him in this matter on account of his magnanimity and the honour which he has paid you.'
"On hearing this, Madhu answered, 'So be it I' and beholding Ravana, the Lord of the Rakshasas, he approached him according to tradition and paid him due tribute.
"Thus honoured, Dashagriva passed a night in Madhu's abode and then started on his way. Having reached Kailasha, that mountain that served as Vaishravana's retreat, the Indra among the Rakshasas, like unto Mahendra, caused his army to set up camp."