"When the all-powerful Mahendra had been overcome by the son of Ravana, the Gods with Prajapati at their head went to Lanka and, approaching Dashagriva, who was surrounded by his brothers, Prajapati, from the sky where he was stationed, addressed him in conciliatory tones, saying:—
"'My Dear Ravana, I am pleased with your son's bearing on the battlefield! Assuredly in valour and heroism, he is thine equal if not your superior! You have overcome the Three Worlds by your prowess and fulfilled your vow; I am gratified with you and your son. He, standing there full of strength and energy, will become renowned in the worlds under the name of Indrajita and that Rakshasa, with whose support the Gods have been brought under your subjection, shall become powerful and invincible. O Long-armed Hero, do you release Mahendra, the Chastiser of Paka and say what the inhabitants of heaven shall bestow on you as ransom?'
"Then that victorious warrior, Indrajita, answered saying:—
"'O Lord, if that God is to be set free, then grant me immortality!'
"Thereupon the all-powerful Prajapati replied to Meghanada, saying:—
"'There is none immortal on earth, whether it be beast, bird or any other mighty being.'
"Hearing this irrevocable decree of the Grandsire, the Lord, Indra's vanquisher, the courageous Meghanada, said to him:—
"'Then hear me, and may it come to pass in this wise on the release of Shatakratu! This is my desire, I, who constantly worship Pavaka with oblations and mantras and who delight in fighting and overcoming my foes, let the chariot of Vibhabasu harnessed to steeds, be placed at my service and may death be unable to strike me down when I am mounted upon it! This is my request, but, should I engage in combat without having completed my prayers and offered my oblations to the God of Fire, then may I perish! All, O Lord, seek immortality by means of penances; I wish to acquire immortality through valour!'
"'Let it be so' said the Blessed Grandsire and thereafter Shakra was set free by Indrajita and the Gods returned to their own abode.
"Meantime, O Rama, the wretched Indra, his glory dimmed, his heart full of anxiety, was plunged in melancholy and, beholding him in that plight, the Grandsire enquired of him, saying:—
"'O Shatakratu, didst you not formerly commit some great sin? O Chief of the Gods, O Lord, when in my wisdom I created men, they were all possessed of the same colour, shape, language and appearance, there was no difference between them in form or aspect, nevertheless my mind was pre-occupied when I reflected on those beings and, I created a woman as distinct from them, modifying each of the male characteristics. Thus I made a female, who on occount of the grace of her limbs became known as Ahalya; "Hala" meaning ugly, from which "Halya" is derived, and she in whom "Halya" does not appear is named Ahalya; this was the name I called her. When I fashioned that woman, O Chief of the Gods, O Bull among the Celestials, I reflected, "To whom shall she belong?" This is how, O Lord Shakra, O Destroyer of Cities, you didst come to know this woman and, in thine heart, being the Lord of the Worlds, you didst resolve "she shall be mine".'
"'Meantime I placed her under the protection of the magnanimous Gautama and he, having taken care of her for many years, gave her back to me, whereupon I, having tested the absolute self-control of that illustrious ascetic and recognizing the height of his austerity, gave her to him in wedlock. That virtuous and renowned Muni was gratified with her company but the Gods were in despair because she had been given to Gautama and you, enraged, your heart filled with desire, went to the hermitage of the Sage and beheld the woman who was as radiant as a flame in a brazier, whereupon you didst ravish her in the heat of your passion. Thereafter you were observed by that high-born Rishi in the hermitage and, in his indignation, that extremely powerful ascetic cursed you, due to which, O King of the Gods, you have just suffered this change of circumstance.
And that ascetic addressed you, saying:—
"'"Since you have wantonly ravished my spouse, O Vasava, you shalt fall captive to thine enemy on the field of battle! This vile passion that you have manifested, O Perverse Wretch, will undoubtedly spread among men and women and whosoever shall be guilty of it shall bear half the responsibility, whilst the other half shall be thine; nor shall your state be permanent, for the sovereignty of whoever the Gods choose as their King shall not endure; this is the curse I pronounce on you!"
"'Thus spoke Gautama and thereafter he reproached his spouse, and that exalted ascetic addressed her, saying:—
"O Shameless One, leave my hermitage! Though young and lovely, since you are inconstant, your beauty shall no longer belong to you alone in the world and shall assuredly be shared by all beings, since on thine account, this mischief has been perpetrated by Indra! From now on, all beings shall partake of your beauty!"
"'Then Ahalya sought to propitiate the great Rishi Gautama, saying:—
"'"It was in ignorance that I suffered myself to be seduced by Indra, O Great Ascetic, for he assumed your form, nor was it by giving way to desire, O Rishi, therefore forgive me, it is your duty!"
"'At these words of Ahalya's, Gautama answered
"'"In the House of Ikshvaku there will be born a mighty warrior named Rama, renowned in the universe and he will repair to the forest for the sake of the brahmins. That long-armed hero will be none other than Vishnu in human form; you shalt behold him, O Blessed One, and, seeing him, you shalt be purified, for it is he who can efface the sin you have committed. Having offered him the traditional hospitality, you shalt return to me once again and we shall resume our common life, O Lady of fair countenance!"
"'Having spoken thus, the Rishi re-entered his hermitage, while his consort gave herself up to rigid penances. It is on account of this Sage's curse that all this has taken place; therefore, O Mighty Hero, call to mind the sin you didst commit. This is why you didst fall a victim to your foes, O Vasava, and for no other cause, therefore, with your senses fully controlled, speedily offer up a sacrifice to Vishnu. Purified by this propitiatory rite, you shalt return to the Celestial Region. Your son, O Lord, did not perish in the fight but was borne away to the ocean by his maternal grandfather.'
"Hearing Brahma's words, Mahendra undertook a sacrifice in honour of Vishnu and thereafter the Lord of the Gods ascended to heaven, reigning there as king.
"I have described to you, how great was the power of Indrajita, who overcame the King of the Gods, how much more therefore was he able to triumph over other beings!"
Hearing these words of Agastya, Rama and Lakshmana as also the monkeys and titans, exclaimed "How wonderful I" and Bibishana, who stood at Rama's side, said:—
"I remember that remarkable feat now, I was formerly witness thereof."
Then Rama addressed Agastya saying:—"All you have said is true"
"This, O Rama, is the narrative of the origin and progress of Ravana, the thorn in the side of the worlds, who, like his son, bore away Shakra, the King of the Gods, in the fight."