The all-powerful Rama, in his astonishment, bowed low to that excellent Rishi Agastya and again enquired of him, saying:—
"O Blessed One, O Best of the Twice-born, when that crud Rakshasa began to range the earth, were the worlds bereft of warriors? Was there no prince, no being, able to oppose him, since that Lord of the Titans met with no resistance, or had the rulers of the worlds lost their power or were the many kings he overcame, without weapons?"
Having listened to the words of that son of Raghu, the blessed Sage answered him smiling, as the Grandsire of the World addresses Rudra, and said:—
"It was destroying the rulers thus that Ravana ranged the earth and, O Rama, Lord of the Worlds, he came to the city of Mahishmati which rivalled that of the Gods, where the Deity of Fire dwelt perpetually. There a monarch reigned, named Arjuna, in effiilgence like unto the fire which was kept there ever concealed in a pit covered by reeds [i.e., Agni Kunda—A pit or hole in the ground where the sacred fire is kept].
"On that day, the powerfill Sovereign of the Haihayas, Lord Arjuna went to the River Narmada to sport with his wives and at that time, Ravana approached Mahishmati and that Indra among the Rakshasas enquired of the King's counsellors, saying:—
"'Tell me quickly, where is the Lord Arjuna, speak truly; I am Ravana who have come to measure my strength with that most powerful of monarchs. Do you announce mine arrival to him!'
"Hearing Ravana's words, the sagacious ministers informed the King of the Rakshasas of the absence of their sovereign and the son of Vishravas learning from the people of the city that Arjuna had departed, went away in the direction of the Vindhya Range, which like unto a cloud floating in space, appeared to him to resemble Himavat and, springing from the earth, it seemed to lick the skies and was possessed of a myriad peaks. Lions frequented its caverns whilst its crystalline cataracts, falling over the cliffs, resounded like peals of laughter, and Gods, Gandharvas as also the Apsaras and Kinneras with their consorts, disporting themselves there, transformed it into a paradise. Its rivers flowed in translucent waves and that Vindhya Range, like unto Himavat, with its peaks and caves resembled Shesha with his hoods, his tongues darting forth.
"Gazing upon it, Ravana reached the Narmada River, whose pure waters flowed over a bed of stones and which emptied itself into the western sea. Buffalo, Srimaras, lions, tigers, bears and elephants, tormented by heat and thirst, agitated the waters, whilst Cakravakas, Kavandas, Hamsas, Sarasas and other waterfowl, with their impassioned warbling, abounded there. The flowering trees formed its diadem, the pairs of Cakravaka birds its breasts, the banks of sand its thighs, the flocks of swans its bright girdle; the pollen of the flowers powdered its limbs, the foam of the waves was its immaculate robe; sweet was its contact for whoever entered it and it was lovely to look upon with its flowering lotuses.
"Dismounting from the Chariot Pushpaka, close to the Narmada, that most beautiful of streams, Dashanana, a bull among titans, accompanied by his ministers, went towards it as towards a lovely and attractive woman and seated himself on the enchanting sandy banks that were frequented by Sages.
"Beholding the Narmada, the ten-necked Ravana, transported with delight, exclaimed 'It is the Ganges herself!'.
Thereafter he addressed his ministers Shuka and Sarana and others, saying:—
"'Surya of a thousand rays seems to have changed the world to gold and, in the sky, that orb of the day whose beams were just now intense, having observed me seated here, has grown as cool as the moon. Anila, who, refreshed by the waters of the Narmada, inspired by fear of me, blows softly diffusing a sweet perfume, that marvellous stream, the Narmada, increaser of felicity, in whose waters crocodile, fish and birds abound, appears like a timid girl. You who were wounded by the weapons of kings equal to Shakra in combat and who were covered with blood like unto the sap of the Sandal Tree, now plunge into the beautiful and hospitable Narmada as elephants intoxicated with ichor and led by Sarvabhauma immerse themselves in the Ganges. Bathing in that great river will free you from all ills! As for me, I shall presently offer up flowers in tranquillity to Kapardin on this sandy bank that shines like the autumn moon.'
"Hearing these words of Ravana, Prahasta, Shuka and Sarana with Mahodara and Dhumraksha dived into the Narmada River and, agitated by those titan leaders resembling elephants, the stream appeared like unto the Ganges when Vamana, Anjana, Padma and other great tuskers disport themselves therein.
"Thereafter, emerging from the waters, those highly powerful Rakshasas soon gathered heaps of flowers that they placed on the sandy bank, whose enchanting radiance rivalled that of a dazzling cloud and, in a moment, those titans had heaped up a mountain of flowers, whereupon the King of the Rakshasas entered the river to bathe, like unto a great tusker entering the Ganges.
"Having bathed and recited the most excellent of prayers according to tradition, Ravana emerged from the waters and divested himself of his wet garments, clothing himself in a white robe. Then the Rakshasas followed their king, who advanced with joined palms, so that they appeared like moving hills. Wherever the Lord of the Rakshasas went, a golden Shiva-Linga was borne before him and he placed it on a sandy altar and worshipped it with flowers, perfumes and sandal-paste. Having paid homage to that symbol that delivers all beings from their sufferings and which was large and exceedingly beautiful, adorned with a crescent moon, that Ranger of the Night, with uplifted arms, danced and sang before it."