"Hearing from the Gods in heaven of Ravana's capture, which resembled the binding of the wind, Paulastya, despite his self-mastery, was moved by tender affection for his offspring and approached the Lord of Mahishmati. Entering the path of the wind, whom he equalled in velocity, that Twice-born One, with the swiftness of thought, reached the City of Mahishmati and, as Brahma enters Indra's capital, he penetrated into that city that resembled Amaravati and was full of prosperous and cheerful people.
"Walking on foot, he advanced like unto the sun with such effulgence that the eye could scarcely rest upon him and, beholding him, the inhabitants hastened to inform Arjuna.
"'It is Paulastya', said that Sovereign of the Haihayas on perceiving him, whereupon, with joined palms, he touched his forehead in salutation as he went forward to meet the ascetic. Like Brihaspati before Shakra so did the Purohita precede the king, bearing the Arghya and also the Madhuparka offerings.
"Thereafter the Rishi drew near like unto die rising sun, and Arjuna, deeply moved on beholding him, paid obeisance to him as Indra offers reverence to Brahma.
Presenting him with the Madhuparka, a cow, and water wherewith to wash his feet, as also the Arghya, that Indra among Monarchs addressed Paulastya in a voice trembling with delight and said:—
"'Since I behold you, O You whose sight is hard to obtain, to-day Mahishmati has become the equal of Amaravati, O Foremost of the Twice-born 1 To-day I am happy, O Lord, to-day, my desires are consummated; to-day my birth is rendered fruitful; to-day, my penance has been blessed since I now embrace your two feet that are worshipped by the Celestial Host. Here is my kingdom and here my sons and my consorts at your service; what are your commands?'
"Then Paulastya, having enquired concerning his welfare, the discharge of his duty and the sacrificial fires and his offspring, said to the Sovereign of the Haihayas:—
"'O Foremost of Kings, whose eyes are as large as lotus petals, whose face shines like the full moon, none is equal to you in strength since you have conquered Dashagriva, he, before whom, the ocean and the wind are stayed and remain motionless in fear, he, my grandson whom you didst make captive on the battlefield, who till now was invincible. You have swallowed his glory and rendered your name illustrious. O Dear Friend, on my request, now release Dashanana!'
"Thereupon Arjuna, without uttering a word, having listened to Paulastya's appeal, cheerfully released the foremost of the Rakshasas and, having set that enemy of the Gods free, Arjuna honoured him with jewels, garlands and celestial raiment and contracted an alliance with him in the presence of fire, then, prostrating himself at the feet of Brahma's son,1 he returned to his abode.
"Thereafter Paulastya himself dismissed the powerful Lord of the Rakshasas after embracing him and he, having received hospitality, departed, ashamed at his defeat, whilst Paulastya, the son of that Grandsire of the World, he the foremost of Munis, who had just delivered Dashagriva, returned to Brahma-Ioka.
"Thus, despite his immense strength, was Ravana, who had been defeated by Kartavirya, released at Paulastya's request. So are the mighty overcome by those who are still mightier than they, O You, who increases the felicity of the Raghavas! He who desires his own happiness should not despise his adversaries.
"Meanwhile the Lord of those eaters of flesh, having contracted a friendship with that thousand-armed monarch, began to range the earth full of arrogance, overcoming its rulers."