"Released by Arjuna, Ravana, the Lord of the Rakshasas, unwearyingly ranged the earth and whenever he heard of any who was possessed of extraordinary strength, whether man or titan, in his arrogance he sought him out in order to provoke him to combat.
"One day he came to the city of Kishkindha and challenged King Bali of the golden diadem.
There he found the kinsfolk of that monkey only, Tara, her father Sushena and the Lord Sugriva, who answered that belligerent one, who had just come, saying:—
"'O King of the Rakshasas, Bali, who would have accepted your challenge, is not here, what other Plavamgama is able to meet you in combat? Bali has gone to the four oceans to perform the Sandhya Ceremony, O Ravana, he will soon return, have patience awhile! That heap of bones, white as conch shells, belongs to those who desired to measure their strength in combat with the Lord of the Vanaras, O Prince. Even hadst you sucked the nectar of immortality, O Ravana, your meeting with Bali would put an end to thine existence. O Son of Vish-ravas, look upon this marvellous universe once more for soon it will no longer be possible for you to do so. Since you are in haste to die, however, go to the southern sea where you will behold Bali who resembles the Deity of Fire.'
"Thereupon, having inveighed against Tara and the others, Ravana, that Ravana of the Worlds, remounted his Chariot Pushpaka and drove towards the southern sea. There he beheld Bali, like unto a mountain of gold, absorbed in the performance of Sandhya.
"Descending from the Pushpaka Car, Ravana of the hue of collyrium, stole upon Bali silently in order to seize him, but by chance, he was observed by him who had no doubts as to his fell design, though Bali remained unmoved like a lion in the presence of a hare or Garuda before a serpent, and he was in no wise perturbed by Ravana of malevolent intent.
"He reflected, 'This is Ravana, who with malice in his soul, approaches in order to seize hold of me. I shall hang him on my girdle and go to the three other oceans, then all will behold mine adversary, Dashagriva, his arms and limbs and his raiment dangling, hooked to my side like a snake caught by Garuda.'
"Thinking thus, Bali remained there reciting his Vedic Mantras in a low voice, like unto the King of the Mountains. Each desiring to lay hold on the other, in the pride their strength inspired in them, the Sovereign of the Monkeys and the Lord of the Rakshasas sought to realise their design.
"Perceiving by the sound of his footsteps that Ravana was about to place his hands upon him, Bali, though his back was turned, caught hold of the titan as Garuda a serpent and, having seized the Lord of the Rakshasas, hooked him to his girdle, thereupon that monkey, with one bound, sprang into the air, and though lacerated and torn by his nails, Bali carried off Ravana as a tempest propels a cloud.
"Meantime the ministers of Dashanana, whom he was bearing away, fell upon Bali emitting loud cries in order to make him release him. Pursued by them, Bali, in his aerial course, shone like the sun that is followed by a drift of clouds in space. Those foremost of the Rakshasas, exhausted by the wind that caused their arms and thighs to shake, were stayed in their course, and the mountains themselves made way for Bali, how much more those who, made of flesh and blood, sought to survive. With a speed impossible to flocks of birds, that Indra among monkeys, in great haste, paid obeisance to all the oceans in turn and, at dusk, received the homage of all winged creatures on the way, he, the foremost among them; thereafter with Ravana he finally reached the Western Sea. There that monkey performed the Sandhya Ceremony and, having bathed, still bearing Dashanana, went to the Northern Sea. Thereafter that great monkey with his adversary traversed thousands of leagues, swift as the wind or thought. Having observed the Sandhya Ceremony at the Northern Sea, Bali, carrying Dashanana, went to the Eastern Sea. There, Vasavi, the Lord of the Monkeys, performed his evening devotions and, still bearing Ravana, he returned to Kishkindha. Having performed the Sandhya at the four oceans, that monkey, weary of supporting Ravana, halted in a wood near Kishkindha and that King of the Monkeys, unhooking Ravana from his girdle, with a mocking laugh, said:—'Whence art you?'
"Greatly astonished, the King of the Rakshasas, whose eyes were half-dosed with fatigue, addressed the Lord of the Monkeys thus:—
"'O Foremost of Monkeys, O You who resemblest Mahendra, I am the Lord of the Rakshasas, Ravana, who came in the hope of entering into combat with you and here I am, your captive! What strength, what energy, what inner power has enabled you to bind me thus without fatigue and with such speed, O Valiant Monkey? Assuredly there are only three beings who could have acted thus, the mind, the wind and Suparna. Having witnessed your power, O Bull among Monkeys, in the presence of fire I wish to enter into an alliance of sincere and enduring friendship with you! Consorts, sons, city, kingdom, pleasures, raiment and food will all be shared by us, O King, O Foremost of the Monkeys!'
"Thereupon, lighting a fire, monkey and titan became brothers and embraced each other. Clasping hands, the monkey and the titan joyfully entered Kishkindha, like unto two lions into a rocky cavern. Resembling another Sugriva, Ravana sojourned there for a month and thereafter his ministers desirous of overcoming the Three Worlds, led him away.
"Thus did Ravana act with Bali formerly and, although humbled by him, swore to be his brother in the presence of fire. Bali's strength was unequalled, O Rama, it was immeasurable; yet you didst consume him as the fire a cricket."