The installation of Kakutstha, who was versed in the science of the Self, having taken place, the following night was spent by his subjects in rejoicing and when it had passed, at dawn, those who were charged with waking the king assembled at the palace. Thereafter these sweet-voiced minstrels, like unto the learned Kinneras, chanted pleasantly to that valiant prince as to a cherished son:—
"O Gentle Hero, awake! O You who increases the felicity of Kausbalya, when you dost sleep the whole universe is wrapped in slumber, O Monarch! Thine heroism is equal to Vishnu's and your beauty to the Ashvins. You, the rival of Brihaspati in wisdom, art a second Prajapati. Your life's span is like the earth's, your radiance like the sun's, you are endowed with the swiftness of the wind and your profundity is like the deep. You are unshakable like unto Sthanu [i.e., Shiva] and your charm rivals the moon. No king was ever like unto you in the past nor shall there ever be such a monarch in time to come, O Sovereign. O Lion among Men, since you are invincible, firm in your duty and ever seeks the welfare of your subjects, glory and prosperity will never desert you. Humility and piety ever reside in you, O Kakutstha!"
These and similar praises were addressed to him by the bards as also the Sutas [i.e., A class of personal attendants], who, with divine hymns, sought to rouse Raghava, and it was amidst these melodious chants that he woke from sleep and rose from his couch, that was covered with white stuffs, like unto Vishnu when he leaves the snake that has served as his bed.
Then that magnanimous hero stood up and countless attendants approached him, bowing with joined palms, offering him beautiful ewers for washing and, having bathed and purified himself, he went at the appointed hour to kindle the sacrificial fire and thereafter with swift steps, he entered the sacred pavilion reserved for the Ikshvakus. There for a long time Rama paid homage to the Gods, his ancestors and the brahmins, according to tradition, then, coming forth surrounded by his people, he went to the outer court of the palace accompanied by his counsellors and also the family priests, who shone in their own effulgence, led by Vasishtha. Wealthy Kshatriyas, Lords of countless provinces walked at Rama's side, as the Celestials by Shakra. Bharata, Lakshmana and Shatrughna, of great renown, joyfully formed an escort of honour round him, like unto the Three Vedas at the Adhvara Sacrifice[1]. At bis side walked innumerable attendants with joined palms and radiant countenance, named Muditas. Twenty monkeys full of energy and prowess led by Sugriva followed Rama, and Bibishana between four Rakshasas walked beside that hero, as Guhyakas by the Lord of Wealth. Elders, and merchants and those of noble families, bowing to the king, followed him with dignity, and that Sovereign, surrounded by the blessed and illustrious Rishis, mighty kings, monkeys and Rakshasas, like unto the Chief of the Gods, received continual homage from the ascetics; and the countless praises of those who entered Rama's presence, and traditions, full of eloquence and piety, were constantly recited by the magnanimous brahmins versed in the Scriptures.
On having heard the whole story, that descendant of the House of Raghu addressed the Sage Agastya and said:—
"Revered Lord, Riksharajas was the name of Sugriva and Bali's sire but what was the name of their mother? From whence did she come and why were Bali and Sugriva so called? Do you tell me all concerning this matter."
Thereupon the Sage Agastya answered:—
"O Rama, I shall relate everything briefly that I heard from Shri Narada when he visited my hermitage.
"Once, when that highly virtuous ascetic was journeying through the world, he came to my retreat and I paid him due homage and made him welcome.
When he was seated at his ease, being curious, I put this same question to him and he answered me, saying:—
"'Hear me, O Great Ascetic, Foremost of the Pious, there is a mountain named Meru, which is all golden, enchanting and most beautiful. Its central peak is greatly revered by the Gods and the marvellous assembly hall of Brahma is situated there, which extends over a hundred leagues. The Four-mouthed Deity, sprung from a lotus, ever resides there and, on a certain occasion while he was practising Yoga, a few tears fell from his eyes, whereupon the Patriarch, with his hand, brushed them away allowing them to fall on the earth and from them a monkey was born.
"'O Foremost of Men, as soon as that monkey appeared, the high-souled Brahma instructed him in sweet accents, saying:—
"'"Do you proceed to that foremost of the mountains where the Gods perpetually dwell, O Chief of Monkeys, and subsist there on the various fruits and roots. On that enchanting mountain, you should live depending on me, O Foremost of Monkeys, living in this wise for some time, you sbalt attain prosperity."'
"O Rama, that great monkey, offering salutations to the feet of Brahma, said to the Creator of the World:—
"'O Lord, I shall execute your behest and live depending on You!'
"Thereafter that forest dweller immediately proceeded to the wood abounding in fruit and blossom, and there he lived on fruits, gathering honey and various blooms, returning to Brahma each evening with an offering of the most excellent fruit and flowers, which he placed at the feet of that God of Gods. In this way he spent a long time on that mountain.
"O Rama, once that great monkey, Riksharajas, was afflicted by thirst and went to the northern peak of Mount Meru where he beheld a lake ringing with the songs of a myriad birds. Shaking his neck in delight, he observed his reflection in the waters and, beholding that image, the monkey chief filled with anger and anxiety asked himself, 'What arch enemy of mine dwells in these waters? I shall destroy the excellent abode of that vicious-souled one!' Thinking thus within himself, that monkey, in his impetuosity, plunged into the lake and with a bound emerged once more, but as he rose from the waters, he found himself transformed into a woman, who was extremely charming, graceful and fair.
"Her waist was wide, her eyebrows symmetrical, her hair black and curly, her countenance fair and smiling, her bosom high and her beauty matchless. On the banks of that lake, she appeared enchanting, illumining the four quarters, agitating the minds of all beings and, in the Three Worlds, she was as beautiful as any. O Rama, she resembled the simple creeper, Sastilata, or Lakshmi bereft of her lotus or the pure rays of the moon or Parvati.
"At that time, Indra, the Lord of the Celestials, having worshipped the feet of Brahma, was returning by that way and the Sun-god also came thither.
"Simultaneously beholding that lovely female form, they were overcome with desire, and, their minds being in a ferment, they were wholly swept away.
"Thereupon Indra begot a son on that woman, named Bali, so-called because his seed fell on the hair of that beauty, and the Solar Deity begot another son on her, named Sugriva, who sprang from her neck.
"Those two powerful monkeys being born, Indra conferred a lasting golden chain on Bali and returned to his own abode and, having engaged Hanuman, the Wind-god's son, in the service of Sugriva, the Sun-god too returned to the Celestial Region.
"O King, when the sun rose after that night had passed, Riksharajas resumed his own monkey shape and he gave his two highly powerful sons, those foremost of monkeys possessed of yellow eyes, able to change their shape at will, some honey like unto nectar to drink.
Thereafter, taking them with him, he went to the abode of Brahma and that God, beholding Riksharajas with his two sons, consoled him in diverse ways and issued a command to his messenger, saying:—
"'At my behest, O Messenger, proceed to the beautiful City of Kishkindha, that large, golden and enchanting capital is worthy of Riksharajas. There thousands of Vanaras dwell, besides those who are endowed with magic powers. Inaccessible and abounding in gems, those of the four castes inhabit it, and it is pure and sacred.
"'At my command, Vishvakarma created that celestial and enchanting City of Kishkindha, do you find an abode for Riksharajas, the foremost of the Monkeys and his sons there, and, having called the leading Plavamgamas together and received them courteously, install him on the throne. On beholding this monkey chief, gifted with intelligence, they will all become subject to him.'
"Brahma having spoken thus, the celestial messenger with Riksharajas proceeded to that most beautiful City of Kishkindha with the speed of the wind where, as commanded by Brahma, he installed Riksharajas as king.
"Thereafter, having bathed and being adorned with a crown and various ornaments, Riksharajas, with a joyful heart began to rule over the monkeys, and all the Vanaras residing on the earth, comprising the Seven Islands and bounded by the sea, became subject to him.
"Thus Riksharajas was both father and mother to Bali and Sugriva; may prosperity attend you! The learned, who listen to and cause others to hear this narrative, enhancing their delight, obtain all their desires.
"O Lord, I have duly described at length all that concerns the birth of the monkey kings and the Rakshasas."
Shri Rama with his brothers, hearing that ancient and wonderful tale, was astonished and, having listened to the Rishi Agastya's narrative, said:—
"By your favour, O Rishi, I have heard this highly sacred theme! O Great Muni, I am filled with amazement on hearing the story of Bali and Sugriva. O Blessed One, I am not surprised that those two sons of the Gods should be so powerful since their origin was divine!"
Rama, having uttered these words, Agastya said:—
"O Long-armed One, even thus was the birth of Bali and Sugriva brought about in days of yore. I shall now relate another ancient legend to you, 0 Rama, as to why Ravana bore Sita away, hear me with attention!
"In the Golden Age, Ravana offered reverence to the Grandsire's offspring, that truthful Rishi Sanatkumara, who, shining in his own effulgence, was as resplendent as the sun and who was seated in his own retreat, and paying homage to him, Ravana said:—
"'O Lord, who is there now among the Gods, who is brave and powerful and by whose aid the Celestials can overcome their foes, one whom the Twice-born worship daily and upon whom devotees constantly meditate? O You, whose wealth is your piety and who art possessed of the sixfold riches, do you graciously tell me in detail.'
"Being conversant with Ravana's intentions, the glorious Sage Sanatkumara, having knowledge of all things through his meditations, said to him affectionately:—
'Hear me, O My Son, the wise, in their sacrifices, duly pay homage to the Lord of the Universe, whose origin is unknown to us, who is daily worshipped by the Celestials and Asuras, He is the supremely powerful Narayana from whose navel, Brahma, the Creator of the World has sprung and from whom, all things animate and inanimate are born. Yogis meditate upon Him and offer sacrifices in His honour according to the Puranas, Vedas, Pancaratras and other rituals. In combat, He is ever victorious over the Daityas, Danavas, Rakshasas and other enemies of the Gods, all of whom ever worship Him.'
"Hearing the words of the great Ascetic Sanatkumara, Ravana, the Lord of the Rakshasas, making obeisance to him, answered:—
"'Being slain by Hari, to what state do the Daityas, Danavas and Rakshasas attain and why does Hari destroy them?'
"Thereupon Sanatkumara replied:—
'They who are slain by the Gods abide in Svarga but are born again on earth when their merit is exhausted. They are born and they die, they suffer and enjoy according to the merits of their previous births, but those who are slain by the Wielder of the Discus, the Lord of the Three Worlds, Hari, attain to His region, since even His wrath is like unto a boon, O King!'
"Hearing the words spoken by that mighty Ascetic Sanatkumara, that night-ranger, Ravana, filled with delight and wonder, began to reflect on how he might enter into conflict with the Lord."
"As the vicious-souled Ravana was reflecting thus, the great Ascetic Sanatkumara said to him:—
"'O Long-armed Warrior, what your mind has conceived will be accomplished in a great encounter! Rejoice and wait awhile!'
"Hearing these words, the long-armed Ravana addressed the Sage and said:—
"'O Foremost of the Rishis, do you tell me in detail what are His distinguishing characteristics?'
"Having listened to the Lord of the Rakshasas, the ascetic replied:—
"'Listen and I will tell you all:—O Foremost of the Rakshasas, in the universe of animate and inanimate beings, that great God is all-pervading, subtle, eternal and omnipresent. He is present in the Celestial Region, on earth and in the region under the earth, on the mountains, in the forests and all stationary objects, rivers and cities; He is "Aum", He is Truth, He is Savitri and the earth; He is the supporter of the earth and the Serpent Ananta; He is day and night, morning and evening, death, the moon, time, the wind, Brahma, Rudra, Indra and Varuna. He causes the worlds to appear and shine forth; He creates them, destroys them, rules over them and sports therein. He is eternal, the Lord of Men, He is Vishnu, the Ancient Purusha and die only Destroyer. What more is there to say, O Dashanana? He pervades the Three Worlds, the moving and unmoving. Wearing yellow raiment like unto the filaments of a lotus, Narayana resembles the lightning flashes. Bearing the Shrivatsa Mark on His breast, that cloud-coloured Lord, like unto the moon, is pleasing to look upon. Lakshmi resides in His body in the form of warfare, as lightning in the clouds. Neither Devas, Asuras nor Nagas are able to look on Him but the one, with whom He is pleased, alone beholds Him. O My Son, neither by the fruits of sacrifice, penance, self-control, gifts nor rituals nor by any other means can one behold that Supreme God. Those alone see Him who have surrendered their whole life and being to Him and who, by virtue of discriminative knowledge, have burnt up all their sins. If you desirest to behold Him, hear me and I will tell you all.
"'At the close of the Golden Age and the beginning of the Silver Age, the Lord Narayana will assume human form for the sake of men and the Gods. A son, named Rama, will be born to Dasaratha of the Ikshvaku Race, who will rule on earth. Rama will be highly effulgent, powerful and as forbearing as the earth nor shall his enemies in combat be able to look on him, as one is unable to gaze upon the sun.
"'His consort, the gracious Lakshmi shall be renowned under the name of Sita and be born as the daughter of Janaka, King of Mithila; she will issue from the earth. In beauty, she will be unequalled in the world, endowed with auspicious marks she will ever follow Rama like a shadow, as the moon is accompanied by its beams; of virtuous conduct, she will be chaste and patient. Sita and Rama will always appear together as the sun and its rays. O Ravana, I have now related to you all that concerns Narayana, the great, eternal and incomprehensible Brahman.'
"O Raghava, on hearing these words, the mighty Lord of the Rakshasas began to devise means whereby he might enter into combat with you. Meditating again and again on the words of Sanatkumara, he began to wander here and there."
Listening to this narrative, Rama, his eyes wide with wonder, was greatly astonished and, being delighted, he again addressed Agastya, the foremost of the wise, saying:—
"Do you recount the ancient traditions further, O Lord."
The illustrious Rishi Agastya, sprung from a vessel, paying obeisance to Rama, as Brahma pays homage to Shiva, addressed that hero whose prowess was truth, saying:—
"Do you hear me!"
Thereafter the highly effulgent Agastya began to relate the subsequent events in that legend, and the blessed Sage with a delighted heart described to Rama all he had heard narrated, saying:—
"O Illustrious and Long-armed Rama, it is on this account that the vicious-souled Ravana stole Sita, the daughter of Janaka, away. O You who art possessed of long arms, O Great Warrior, O You who art invincible, Narada recounted this tale to me on the summit of the Meru Mountain. O Raghava, the highly effulgent One told me this story in the presence of the Devas, Gandharvas, Siddhas, Ascetics and other great Beings. O Lord of Monarchs, O Conferer of Honours, do you hear this tale which removes great sins!
Listening to it, O You of long arms, the Rishis and the Devas, with delighted hearts, their eyes shining with the splendour of lotus flowers, said to the Ascetic Narada:—
"'He, who listens to or relates this story with faith and devotion, shall be blessed with sons and grandsons and, after his death, be honoured in the Celestial Region.'"
"O Rama, Ravana, the Lord of the Rakshasas, proud of his strength, accompanied by his warriors, began to range the earth desirous of conquest. Whenever he heard of any among the Daityas, Danavas or Rakshasas who were powerful, he challenged them to fight.
"O Lord of the Earth, having traversed the whole world, the Ten-necked Rakshasa beheld the Sage Narada returning from Brahmaloka to his own abode, like unto a second sun, passing through the clouds.
Then Ravana, with a cheerful heart, approached him and, with joined palms, addressed the Sage, saying:—
"'O You gifted with the six kinds of wealth, many times you have beheld all creation from Brahma down to an insect. Do you tell me, O Great One, in which region the inhabitants are the most powerful, I wish to challenge them to combat according to my whim.'
"Thereupon, reflecting an instant, the divine Sage Narada answered him saying:—
"'O King, there is a large island in the Milky Ocean, where all the inhabitants are endowed with great strength and are of enormous stature, as effulgent as the moon's beams, possessing fair complexions, voices as deep as the muttering of clouds and who are extremely valiant. Their arms are long and like iron bars, O King of die Asuras, such are the people of that island, who are as powerful as you wouldst wish to see on earth.'
"Hearing the words of Narada, Ravana said:—
"'O Divine Sage, why are the people of that island so strong and how did such mighty beings come to live in that place? O Lord, do you relate everything to me at length. The whole world is ever seen by you like a fruit in the palm of the hand!'
"Hearing the words of Ravana, the blessed Sage said:—
"'O Lord of the Rakshasas, the people of that island constantly worship Narayana with their whole being. Their hearts and minds are ever set on Him and, having given their lives and souls to Narayana alone, they have been blessed with that abode and dwell on Sveta-dvipa. Those who die in battle at the hands of Shri Narayana, Bearer of the discus and Preserver of the World, go to the celestial region. O Friend, neither by sacrifice, penance, excellent gifts nor by any other pious act does one attain to that region full of bliss.'
"Hearing these words of Narada, Ravana was amazed and reflecting awhile, said:—
'I will enter into conflict with these people 1'
"Thereafter, taking leave of Narada, he proceeded to Sveta-dvipa and Narada, pondering for a long time, curious to witness that encounter, speedily left for that island, he being fond of mischief and conflict.
"O Prince, Ravana, with his Rakshasas, advanced on Sveta-dvipa, rending the four quarters with his leonine roars, and Narada preceded him to that island that was difficult of access even to the Devas.
"There the Pushpaka Car of the mighty Ravana was assailed by adverse winds so that it was unable to stand against them and was tossed about like a straw, nor could it remain stationary on account of the furious blasts.
Then Ravana's counsellors said to him:—
"'O Lord, we are beside ourselves and overcome by fear; it is not possible for us to remain here, how then shall we be able to fight?'
"Speaking thus, the Rakshasas fled away in all directions; then Ravana sent away his aerial car decorated with gold with the Rakshasas and, assuming a terrible form, entered the island alone.
"Thereafter, as he was approaching, he was observed by many women of that white island, who, drawing near, took hold of his hand and smiling, said:—
"'Why hast you come hither? Who art you? Who is your sire? Who has sent you, tell us all candidly?'
"Than Ravana, enraged, answered:—
"'I am the son of the Sage Vishravas and my name is Ravana! I have come hither in order to fight but I see no warrior here!'
"When the wicked-minded Rakshasa had spoken thus, the maidens laughed gently, but one of them, incensed, suddenly took hold of Ravana as one would a child and, as if in play, tossed him to and fro to her companions, saying
"'See, I have caught an insect, how wonderful it is with its ten hands, twenty arms and its colour resembling a heap of antimony!'
"Thereafter, they passed him from hand to hand in play, each spinning him with her fingers and Ravana, worn out by being handled thus, grew exceedingly angry and bit the hand of one of those fair ones, who, being in pain, let him go, whereupon another, seizing the powerful Rakshasa, rose into the sky. Then Ravana, in fury, tore her with his nails and being dropped by that damsel, the night-ranger, terrified, fell into the waters of the sea, as a mountain peak when shattered by a thunderbolt.
"O Rama, those youthful women of Sveta-dvipa again caught hold of the Rakshasa and began to fling him to and fro. At that moment, the illustrious Sage Narada, observing Ravana's plight, was astonished and, laughing loudly, began to dance with delight.
"O Great King, desirous of receiving death at your hand, the wicked Ravana bore Sita away. You are Narayana, the Wielder of the Conch, discus and mace. You'dost bear the lotus, the thunderbolt and the bow in thine hands. You are Hrishikesha and art adorned with the Shrivatsa Mark, You are the Maha-Yogi, ever worshipped by the Devas and You dost confer fearlessness on Your devotees. You have assumed a human form in order to slay Ravana. Dost You know your Self to be Narayana, O Blessed One, do not forget your real Self, recollect that You are the true Self; Brahma Himself has declared You to be the Mystery of all mysteries!
"O Prince of the Raghus, You are the Three Gunas, the Three Vedas, The Three Regions, that of the Celestials, of men and the region under the earth, You dost sport in the three divisions of time, You are conversant with the science of archery, music and medicine, You are the Destroyer of the enemies of the Gods. In days of yore, You didst traverse the Three Worlds in three strides. You are born of Aditi and art the younger brother of Indra, born to bind Bali. O Foremost of the Gods, the purpose of the Devas has been accomplished! The wicked Ravana with his sons and kinsmen has been slain; the Rishis, who have piety as their wealth, and all the Gods are gratified. O Chief of the Immortals, all this has been brought about by Your grace!
"Sita is the personification of Lakshmi and arose from the earth; for your sake, she was born in the House of Janaka. Bringing her to Lanka, Ravana protected her with care as his own mother. O Rama, I have related the whole story to you, the immortal Narada described it to me, having heard it from the Rishi Sanatkumara; Dashanana followed the instructions of Sanatkumara faithfully.
"Whoever listens to this narrative in faith and knowledge at the time of sacrifice, his offerings of food, becoming imperishable, reach the ancestors."
Hearing this divine theme, the lotus-eyed Rama, with his brothers, was greatly astonished and the monkeys, their eyes wide with delight, with Sugriva, the Rakshasas, Bibishana, the kings, their counsellors and the assembled Brahmins, Kshatriyas, Vaishyas and Shudras gazed on Rama with joy.
Then the highly effulgent Agastya said to Rama:—
"O Rama, we have all looked on You and been honoured by you and now beg leave to depart."
Speaking thus and having received due homage, they returned whence they had come.
The sun having set, Rama, the foremost of men, bade farewell to the monkeys and their Sovereign and duly performed the Sandhya Rites; thereafter night having gradually set in, he entered the inner apartments.