Having been duly installed as king, Raghava spent his days directing all those things pertaining to the inhabitants of the city and country. After some time, he, with joined palms, addressed the King of Mithila in these terms:—
"O Lord, now that our happiness is assured by your support, it being by virtue of your great prowess that I have been able to slay Ravana, all those of the Houses of Ikshvaku and Mithila, everywhere, enjoy a felicity without parallel. Do you return to your capital after accepting these jewels; Prince Bharata will attend you as thine escort."
"Be it so!" replied Janaka and prepared to depart, thereafter adding:—
"I am pleased with you and your conduct; as for the gems that you have heaped upon me, I bequeath them all to my daughter, O Prince!"
Janaka having departed, Raghava, with joined palms, respectfully addressed the son of Kaikeyi, his maternal uncle, the Prince Yudajita, saying:—
"This empire, I myself, Bharata and Lakshmana also, are at your disposal, O Lion among Men. The King, thine aged sire may be grieving on your behalf and your return this day will delight him, O Lord. Lakshmana will follow you as thine escort after you have accepted wealth and gems of every kind."
Acquiescing to his request, Yudajita answered "It is well! As for the pearls and gold, do you retain them forever!" Thereafter, the son of Kaikeya paid obeisance to Rama, keeping him on his right hand and after receiving homage, he departed, followed by Lakshmana as Vishnu by Indra at the time of the destruction of Vritra.
Having bade farewell to his maternal uncle, Rama embraced his friend, Pratardana, the King of Kashi, and addressed him in these words:—
"You have proved your friendship and devotion to the full, O Prince, as witnessed by the campaign undertaken with Bharata. Now return this day to the enchanting City of Benares of which you are the support and which is surrounded by great walls and magnificent gateways."
Speaking thus, the virtuous Kakutstha, rising from his throne, held him in a close embrace for a long time, thereafter permitting him to take his leave. Bidding farewell to the King of Kashi, Raghava, the increaser of Kaushalya's joy, speedily returned to his own city in safety.
Having dismissed Kasheya, Raghava smilingly addressed courteous words to the hundred monarchs present and said to them:—
"Your loyalty has been unshakable and your affection enduring; through the grace of your devotion and the prowess of magnanimous warriors such as you are, that insensate and perverse wretch, Ravana, has been slain! It is your prowess that has destroyed him, I was merely the occasion of his destruction in the fight with his forces, his sons, his ministers and his kinsfolk. Hearing that the daughter of King Janaka had been borne away in the forest, the great-hearted Bharata summoned you all. Your devotion has been unanimous, O Princes of great soul, but your stay here has been prolonged and I now wish to assure myself of your safe return."
Then the kings, greatly delighted, answered him saying:—
"By the grace of heaven you have triumphed, O Rama, and hast regained your kingdom! By divine grace, you have recovered Sita! By divine grace, your foe is vanquished! To behold you victorious and delivered from thine enemies, O Rama, was our most ardent desire and is now our supreme satisfaction! The praises you have heaped upon us are natural to you, O You whose merits are such that we cannot match them with our tributes. We are about to take leave of you but you will ever remain in our thoughts! O Long-armed Warrior, we shall return full of devotion to you. Mayest you, O Great Prince, ever hold us in affection."
"Be it so!" replied Rama and the kings, highly delighted paid obeisance to Raghava with joined palms, eager to return home and, having been duly honoured by him, went to their own countries.