In this way, the bears, monkeys and titans passed their time with Rama, and thereafter the mighty Raghava said to Sugriva:—
"Return to Kishkindha, My Friend, which may not be conquered by the Gods or Asuras themselves. With your ministers, rule over thine empire without hindrance. O Mighty King, you should look on Angada with supreme affection as also Hanuman and the great-hearted Nala, Sushena your valiant father-in-law, and Tara the foremost of warriors, the invincible Kamuda and Nila who is full of strength, the energetic Shatabali, Mainda, Dvivida, Gaja, Gavaksha, Gavaya, the mighty Sharabha and the King of the Bears the indomitable Jambavan. Look also with affection on Gandhamadana, the agile Rishabha, the Plavamgamas Suptala, Kesharin, Shumbha and Shankashuda, all these magnanimous ones, who in order to serve my cause were ready to give up their lives; look on them always with friendliness and never cause them pain."
Having spoken thus to Sugriva, whom he embraced again and again, Rama said affectionately to Bibishana:—
"Do you rule Lanka faithfully; you are conversant with your duty, this is my conviction and also of those in the capital, the Rakshasas and your brother Vaishravana. Give no place in your soul to evil, O King! Just monarchs are assured of earthly prosperity. Think ever of me and Sugriva, mine ally, O Prince, and in perfect contentment go hence without anxiety!"
Hearing Rama's words, the bears, monkeys and Rakshasas cried, "Excellent! Excellent!" praising Kakutstha again and again, saying:—
"Your wisdom, O Long-armed Hero, your wonderful valour, thine extreme goodness, O Rama, has ever rendered you the equal of Svyambhu!"
While the monkeys and the titans were speaking thus, Hanuman, bowing to Raghava, said:—
"I shall ever hold you in the greatest affection, O Prince, my devotion is thine forever, O Hero, nor shall I give mine allegiance to any other object. As long as your story is told in the world, assuredly life will remain in my body, O Valiant Rama. The Apsaras will recount thine history and all your divine exploits to me, O Joy of the Raghus, O Lion among Men, and, listening to them, O Great Hero, the nectar of your deeds will dispel all mine anxieties, as the wind chases away a flock of clouds."
As Hanuman was speaking, Rama rose from his marvellous throne and, embracing him tenderly, said to him:—
"Undoubtedly so will it be, O Best of Monkeys, as long as my story is current in the world, so long will your fame endure and life remain in your body. For every service you have rendered me, I would give up my life and still remain your debtor, O Monkey. In mine heart, the memory of what you have done for me will ever abide, O Hanuman; it is in times of misfortune that one has recourse to those whom one has benefited."
Thereafter, taking from his neck a string  of pearls from which an emerald as bright as the moon hung, Raghava placed it round Hanuman's and, with that rope of pearls falling on his breast, the monkey appeared as radiant as Mount Sumeru when the moon passes over the summit of that golden peak.
At a signal from Hanuman, those powerful monkeys, having placed their heads at the feet of Raghava, rising one after the other, went away.
Sugriva, who held Rama in a firm embrace, and the virtuous Bibishana were shaking with sobs and all were weeping, their eyes brimming with tears, beside themselves, distracted with grief as it were, on leaving Raghava. Overwhelmed with gifts by the magnanimous Rama, each returned to his own country, as souls leave the body. Titans, bears and monkeys, after bowing to Rama, the Increaser of the glory of the Raghu Race, their eyes filled with tears, caused by that separation, took the road to their own countries.