Having said farewell to the bears, the monkeys and the titans, the long-armed Rama began to live happily with his brothers.
One day, at noon, that great Prince Raghava heard a melodious voice speaking from the sky, saying:—
"O My Friend Rama, look on me and know, O Prince, that it is I, Pushpaka, who come from Kuvera's abode.
At his command I have returned from his palace; it is he, O First of Men, who has told me to place myself at your service, saying:—
"'You have been won by the magnanimous Prince Raghava in the fight when he struck down Ravana, that invincible Monarch of the Titans. I experienced supreme felicity on the slaying of that wretch with his forces, sons and kinsfolk. Having been made captive in Lanka by Rama, the Paramatman, do you go and serve him as a vehicle, O Friend! It is I who command you! It is my supreme desire that you should carry that hero, the Joy of the Raghu Race, round the world; go without anxiety!'
"Obedient to the behests of the illustrious Dhanada, I have reached you without difficulty and place myself at your disposal. Inaccessible to all beings, at Dhanada's will, in obedience to your commands I come to surrender my power to your service."
Hearing these words, the valiant Rama answered the Pushpaka Car in the sky, that had returned to him, saying:—
"O Most wonderful of chariots, O Pushpaka, welcome to you; Dhanada's generosity must not find me wanting!"
Thereafter the long-armed Raghava paid homage to Pushpaka with roasted grain, flowers and fragrant perfumes, saying:—
"Go now, O Pushpaka, wherever you desirest but come again whenever I call you to mind! Go by the path of the Siddhas, O Friend, and let no harm come to you. Mayest you not suffer any collision in your fantastic joumeyings in space, such is my will!"
Rama, having dismissed the aerial car with due homage, Pushpaka replying 'So be it,' went wheresoever it desired and, when that chariot of pure soul had disappeared, Bharata, with joined palms, addressed his elder brother, the Joy of the House of Raghu, saying:—
"O Hero, you who hast the soul of a God, under your rule one beholds beings who are not of the human race speaking frequently, nor is there any disease among men and their days are passed in peace; even the aged do not die and women give birth without pain, whilst all enjoy good health. A real felicity is to be seen among the citizens and, in the rainy season, Parjanya lets loose the nectar of immortality; soft auspicious and balmy breezes blow and the people of town and country all exclaim 'May such a king reign over us long', O Prince!"
Hearing these gracious and flattering words spoken by Bharata, Rama, the foremost of monarchs, was supremely gratified.