Having dismissed the Pushpaka Chariot, which was encrusted with gold, the long-armed Rama entered the Ashoka Grove that was rendered beautiful by Sandal, Agallocha, Mango, Tunga and Kalakeya Trees with groves of Devadaru on all sides, whilst Champaka, Aguru, Punnaga, Madhuka, Panasa and Asana Trees adorned it and radiant Parijatras blazed like smokeless fires. Lodhra, Nipa, Arjuna, Naga, Saptapama, Atimuktaka, Mandara and Kadali Trees screened it with a web of thicket and creepers; Priyangu, Kadamba, Bakula, Jambu, Dadima and Kovidara Trees embellished it on every side with their magnificent flowers, marvellous fruits of celestial fragrances, divine nectar, tender shoots and buds. Heavenly trees of graceful shape, thick with heavy foliage and enchanting blossom were humming with intoxicated bees. Kokilas, Bhringarajas and other birds of varied plumage, their heads crowned with pollen from the Mango Trees, added to the beauty of those marvellous woods. Some of the trees had the brilliance of gold or resembled tongues of flame, others were as dark as collyrium and everywhere only flowers of sweet fragrance and wreaths of blossom of all kinds were to be found.
Pools of various shapes, filled with limpid water on which tufts of flowering lotus and water-lilies floated, were approached by steps made of rubies. Trees in full flower adorned the banks which re-echoed to the call of Datyuhas and Shukas and the cries of geese and swans. That grove was enclosed by flat rocks of differing forms within which were many grassy glades of the sheen of emerald and pearl, and these were adorned by trees rivalling each other in the profusion of their blossom, the earth beneath being heaped with flowers, resembling the sky full of stars, so that it appeared like the garden of Indra or Caitaratha created by Brahma.
Such was Rama's pastoral retreat with its arbours filled with countless seats and grassy couches inviting one to rest; and the Increaser of Raghu's joy entered that magnificent Ashoka Grove and seated himself on a throne of great splendour which was decorated with innumerable flowers and covered with a carpet of Kusha Grass.
Taking Sita by the hand, Kakutstha gave her delicious wine made of distilled honey to drink, as formerly Purandara had offered to Saci. Thereafter pure viands and fruits of every kind were brought by servants, whilst lovely Apsaras, skilled in the arts of singing and dancing, began to perform in the Prince's presence and troops of Nymphs and Uragas, surrounded by the Kinneris intoxicated with wine, danced before Kakutstha, and the virtuous Rama, the most captivating of warriors, delighted those ravishing and charming women.
Seated by Vaidehi, he was radiant with splendour and resembled Vasishtha at the side of Arundhati. In this way, in the joy that possessed him, Rama, like unto a God, each day prepared some new delight for Sita, the Princess of Videha, who was like unto the daughter of a Celestial Being.
While Sita and Raghava sported thus for a long time, the flowery season, that yields perpetual enjoyment, passed away and, as those two tasted every kind of felicity, Spring appeared once more. One day, having fulfilled the functions of state, that virtuous Prince returned to his palace where he spent the rest of the day. On her side, Sita, having worshipped the Gods and performed her morning duties, offering her services to all her mothers-in-law without distinction, thereafter adorned herself with marvellous jewels and re-joined Rama, like unto Saci when re-united with that God of a Thousand Eyes as he returns to his City Trivishtapa.
Beholding his consort glowing with beauty, Raghava experienced an unequalled delight and exclaimed "It is well!" then he addressed the lovely Sita, who resembled a daughter of the Gods, and said:—
"Now, O Vaidehi, that you dost bear a child in your womb, what dost you desire, O Lady of lovely hips? What pleasure can I prepare for you?"
Smiling, Vaidehi answered Rama, saying:—
"O Raghava, I wish to visit the sacred retreats of the Rishis of rigid penances, who dwell on the banks of the Ganges where they subsist on fruit and roots, and there I will throw myself at their feet, O Lord. O Kakutstha, it is my supreme desire even to pass a night in the hermitage of these ascetics who live on fruit and roots."
Then Rama of imperishable exploits gave her permission to do so, saying:—
"Be at peace, O Vaidehi, to-morrow without fail, you shalt go there!"
Having answered Maithili, born of Janaka, in this wise, Kakutstha went to the central court surrounded by his friends.