Having dismissed his companions, Raghava began to ponder within himself and thereafter said to the doorkeeper who stood near:—
"Go speedily and seek out the son of Sumitra, Lakshmana of auspicious marks and the fortunate Bharata and the invincible Shatrughna."
At Rama's command, the janitor paid obeisance with joined palms and went to Lakshmana's abode which he entered unchallenged and there, having saluted the magnanimous prince, he said
"The King desires to see you, do you go to him without delay!"
"It is well!" answered Saumitri and, in obedience to Rag-hava's command, he ascended a chariot and hastened to the palace. When he had departed, the doorkeeper approached Bharata and, saluting him in a like manner, said:—
"The king respectfully requests your presence!"
Hearing these instructions issued by Rama, Bharata, rising swiftly from his seat, started out hurriedly on foot. Beholding the virtuous Bharata going away, the messenger speedily approached Shatrughna's abode and, with joined palms, addressed him, saying:—
"Go quickly, O Prince of the Raghus, the king wishes to see you; Lakshmana has already preceded you as also the renowned Bharata."
At these words, Shatrughna descended from his throne and, bowing to the ground, went to rejoin Raghava.
Meantime the messenger having returned, paid obeisance to Rama and made it known to him that his brothers had come. Learning of the youthful princes' arrival, Rama, who was deeply troubled, with a downcast mien, sad at heart, said to the doorkeeper:—
"Make haste and usher them into my presence! Mine existence depends on them, they are my very life's breath!"
At this command from that Indra of Men, the princes, attired in white, bowed with joined palms and entered respectfully. On beholding Rama, who resembled the moon in eclipse or the sun that the dusk robs of its splendour, whose eyes were filled with tears and who looked like a lotus bereft of its brilliance, they placed their heads at his feet and then stood silent. Thereupon the mighty Rama, shedding tears, having raised them up, clasped them in his arms and said to them:—
"Be seated! You are my whole wealth, you are my very life! It is with your assistance that I attained a kingdom and now rule, O Princes!"
Thus spoke Kakutstha and all, attentive and deeply moved, wondered what words he might be about to address to them.