The younger brother of Raghava, having first assisted Maithili to board it, entered the well-furnished boat ready to depart, thereafter he said to Sumantra, "Wait here with the chariot" and, overcome with grief, he commanded the craft to set sail.
Arriving at the farther bank of the Bhagirathi, Lakshmana, with joined palms, his face bathed in tears, said:—
"A stake has been driven into my heart by the noble and virtuous Rama, which will bring universal censure upon me. Death were better for me this day, verily death would be preferable to the mission on which I am engaged, which the world will condemn. Forgive me and do not impute this offence to me, O Illustrious Princess."
Thereafter, making obeisance, Lakshmana threw himself on the earth. Seeing him weep, paying her homage and calling on death, Maithili, alarmed, said to Lakshmana:—
"What is this? I do not understand anything; tell me the truth, O Lakshmana, why art you agitated? Is the king well? Tell me the cause of your grief!"
Thus questioned by Vaidehi, Lakshmana, his heart filled with anguish, with bowed head, choked with sobs, addressed her saying:—
"Having learnt in open council that he was the object of severe censure in the city and country on thine account, O Daughter of Janaka, Rama, his heart riven, returning home told me of it. I am unable to repeat the things spoken in confidence to me, O Queen. Although you are blameless in mine eyes, the king has repudiated you. Public condemnation has perturbed him; do not misunderstand the matter, O Goddess. I am to leave you in the vicinity of the sacred hermitages. The king has commanded me to do so on the pretext of satisfying your desire. The ascetics' retreats on the banks of the Jahnavi are sacred and enchanting, do not give way to grief, O Lovely One. The foremost of Rishis, the supremely illustrious Sage Valmiki was a great friend of your sire, King Dasaratha. Taking refuge under the shadow of the feet of that magnanimous One and living in chastity, be happy, O Daughter of Janaka. It is by remaining faithfill to your Lord and practising devotion to Rama in thine heart that you shalt, by your conduct, acquire supreme felicity, O Goddess."