Beholding Sita who was sobbing, the sons of the Rishis ran to seek out the blessed Valmiki of rigid penances and, having paid obeisance to the feet of that great ascetic, the children of the Sages informed him that a woman was weeping nearby, saying
"O Lord, a lady resembling Shri, whom we have never before seen and who must be the consort of some great man, her features distorted, is lamenting in the vicinity of the hermitage! O Blessed One, you will surely deem her to be a goddess fallen from heaven! Verily the most lovely of women, in deep distress, appeared before us on the bank of a river, shedding scalding tears, overcome by grief. In this misfortune that was assuredly not merited, she is alone and without a protector. We do not know the lady but do you receive her with kindness for she is close to this retreat and has come to take refuge with you."
Valmiki, that Prince of Sages, being aware of everything by virtue of his asceticism, ascertaining the truth of their words, with rapid steps went to where the Queen was weeping, and, as he strode forward, the disciples followed that illustrious Muni.
Bearing the Arghya in his hands, proceeding on foot, the sagacious Valmiki reached the banks of the river and beheld Raghava's beloved consort lamenting like one bereft. Thereafter, having consoled her by virtue of his holiness, the great ascetic addressed her in a sweet voice, saying
"O Virtuous Lady, you are the daughter-in-law of King Dasaratha, Rama's beloved consort, the daughter of Janaka! O Faithful One, by virtue of my meditations, the cause that brings you here has been revealed to me. O Auspicious One, I am fully aware of your purity, for all that comes to pass in the Three Worlds is known to me. By my spiritual vision, I am convinced of your chaste conduct, O Daughter of Janaka; you are under my protection, O Vaidehi, take comfort 1 Not far from mine hermitage there are many female ascetics established in pious practices, they will care for you as for their own daughter, 0 Dear Child. Now accept the Arghya and trust in me, giving up all anxiety. Do not grieve but look on this as thine abode."
Hearing these excellent words from the Sage, Sita, paying obeisance to his feet, with joined palms, accompanied the ascetic.
Beholding the Sage approaching, followed by Vaidehi, the female ascetics came out to meet them and, filled with delight, said:—
"O Foremost among the Sages, be you welcome; it is long since you have visited us, we bow down to you, what are your commands?"
Hearing their words, Valmiki answered:—
"This lady is Sita, the consort of the virtuous Rama, she is the daughter-in-law of King Dasaratha, the chaste daughter of Janaka. Though innocent, her husband has renounced her, we should all therefore protect her; she is worthy of our affection! Such is my wish, who am your spiritual preceptor; at my behest, do you pay her every honour."
Having placed Sita in the charge of those female ascetics, the great and illustrious Sage Valmiki, followed by his disciples, returned to his hermitage.
[The following Traditional Verses appear here in the original text:]
Thus has this ancient tale been narrated in its entirety, may good betide you! May the might of Vishnu increase!
Those who have installed Shri Rama, who is the colour of a blue lotus, in their heart, will achieve success, nor will they ever experience defeat!
May the rains come when they are needed; may the earth bring forth a rich harvest of grain and may the land be free from disorders. May the brahmins be without anxiety and just.
May prosperity reign in due time and the monsoons never fail. May Raghunath ever triumph and Shri ever reign.
May the kings of the earth protect their subjects in accord with justice. May the cows and the brahmins prosper. May all the worlds be happy.
May good fortune attend the King of Koshala, who is an ocean of virtue; may good fortune attend on that monarch born of the Sovereign of the World.
May good fortune attend on Punyashloka [i.e., Vishnu], the Knower of the Veda and the Vedanta, who appears in the form of a dark-coloured cloud causing delusion to human beings.
May good fortune attend the King of the City of Mithila, the close companion of Vishvamitra, the personification of prosperity in a gracious form.
May good fortune attend on the Blessed Rama, whose subjects are full of joy, who is, with his brothers and Sita, ever devoted to his sire.
May good fortune attend on the One who is constant and noble, who dwelt in and abandoned Saketa (Ayodhya) and wandered about Cittrakuta worshipped by the self-controlled.
May good fortune attend on my Guru, who, bearing the bow, the arrow and the sword, was ever worshipped with devotion by Janaki and Lakshmana.
May good fortune attend on that King of the Vultures who dwelt in the Dandaka Forest, who is the enemy of those who oppose the Gods, who is a great devotee and a granter of liberation.
May good betide him who is exalted by Sattva, who is extremely approachable, who is perfect in virtue and who desired to partake of the roots and fruits offered to him in reverence by Shabari.
May good fortune attend on the destroyer of Bali, he of supreme steadfastness, the fulfiller of the desire of the Monkey King, whose companion was Hanuman.
May good fortune attend him who is resolute in combat, the foremost of the conquerors of the Rakshasas, the blessed Hero of the Raghus, who passed over the ocean by a causeway.
May good fortune attend on the Blessed Rama, King of Kings and Princes, who returned to the celestial city and was installed there with Sita.
May good fortune attend on him who was honoured by the foremost Acaryas and all the great Sages of old engaged in prayer, benediction and blessings.