Having seen the Princess of Mithila conducted to the hermitage, a profound anguish seized the unfortunate Lakshmana, and that hero said to Sumantra, who drove his car repeating the sacred formulas [Lit. 'The Mantra Charioteer']:—
"See into what affliction Sita's plight has thrown Rama! What could be sadder for Raghava than to have to renounce the daughter of Janaka, a chaste wife? It is evident to me that fate has separated Raghava from Vaidehi 1 O Charioteer, destiny is inexorable! Raghava, who, in his wrath, slew the Gods, Gandharvas, Asuras and Rakshasas, is under the sway of destiny. Formerly Rama, at his father's command, dwelt in the vast and lonely Dandaka Forest for fourteen years, but more painful and cruel to me seems the repudiation of Sita through listening to the calumny of the people. What justification was there, O Suta, for this dishonourable procedure consequent on the ill-considered reports regarding Maithili?"
Hearing these words uttered by Lakshmana, the loyal and sagacious Sumantra answered:—
"Do not grieve about Maithili, O Son of Sumitra, O Lakshmana, it was formerly predicted by the brahmins to your Sire. Assuredly Rama is destined to become extremely unhappy; misfortune is his lot! Undoubtedly that long-armed hero will be separated from all those he loves. Under the sway of destiny, that great man will renounce you, Shatrughna and Bharata. Do not repeat to Bharata or Shatrughna what Durvasa uttered in reply to the king who was questioning him. It was in the presence of a large assembly when I was present, O Bull among Men, that the Rishi uttered these words, Vasishtha himself, with others, being there.
"Hearing the words of the Rishi, the foremost of men, Dasaratha, then charged me saying, 'Do not repeat anything that you have heard to others'—I have kept his command scrupulously and, as I see it, under no circumstances should I divulge the matter to any, yet, if I can trust your discretion, O Dear One, then hear me, O Joy of the Raghus. If I repeat the secret formerly confided to me by King Dasaratha then it is fate and inevitable. It is on account of fate that a similar misfortune, the source of your present distress, took place. Do not speak of it before Bharata or in Shatrughna's presence either."
When he heard those grave and portentous words of Sumantra's, Saumitri said to the charioteer, "Tell me the whole truth"