Thus requested by the high-souled Lakshmana, the charioteer began to relate what the ascetic had said.
"Formerly a great Sage, named Durvasa, the son of Atri, passed the rainy season in Vasishtha's hermitage. Your supremely illustrious Sire went there himself, desirous of beholding the magnanimous family priest and he observed the great ascetic, Durvasa, bright as the sun, radiant in his own effulgence, seated by the side of Vasishtha. Those two Sages, the foremost of ascetics, saluted him with respect and bade him welcome, honouring him with a seat, fruit and roots, and water wherewith to wash his feet.
Thereafter he dwelt in their company and the illustrious Rishis there present, at noon, used to recount pleasing traditions, and once during their recital, the king, with joined palms, said to the magnanimous ascetic, the son of Atri:—
"'O Blessed One, how long will my dynasty endure? To what age will Rama live? And my other sons, how long will they survive? How long will the sons of Rama live? Be so good as to tell me the destiny of my race, O Blessed Lord.'
"Hearing the words of King Dasaratha, the highly effulgent Durvasa began to speak thus:—
"'Learn, O King, what happened formerly during the conflict between the Devas and Asuras. The Daityas, whom the Suras threatened, took refuge with the consort of Bhrigu and she, having given them a haven, they dwelt there in safety. Seeing them thus succoured, the Chief of the Gods, enraged, with his sharp-edged discus severed the head of Bhrigu's wife.
"'Beholding the murder of his consort, Bhrigu, in his wrath, instantly cursed Vishnu, the destroyer of enemy hosts, saying:—
"'"Since in thine insensate fury, you have slain my spouse, who should never have died thus, you shalt take birth in the world of men, O Janardana, and there you shalt live separated from your consort for many years."
"'Having pronounced this curse, Bhrigu was overcome with remorse and his merits being exhausted by the malediction he had uttered, he began to propitiate that God, paying homage to the One who delights in penance and protects his devotees. Thereafter that God spoke, saying, "For the good of the worlds, I will be subject to your curse."
"'This is how the illustrious Vishnu was cursed by Bhrigu in days of yore and descended on earth, becoming your son, O Foremost of Monarchs. Renowned in the Three Worlds under the name of Rama, he has to undergo the dire consequences of Bhrigu's curse. He will reign in Ayodhya for a long time. Those who follow him will be happy and prosperous and, having reigned for eleven thousand years, Rama will go to Brahmaloka. Having performed many great sacrifices, distributing costly gifts, he, who may not be overcome by the most powerful beings, shall establish many dynasties and he will beget two sons by Sita.'
"Having related all concerning the past and future of his race to King Dasaratha, Durvasa fell silent, whereupon the king paid obeisance to the two magnanimous ascetics and returned to the city.
"This is what I was formerly told by the Rishi and I have kept it in my heart; none of these things could have happened otherwise. Sita's two sons will be installed in Ayodhya by Raghava, the words of a Sage never fail to be fulfilled. It being so, do not grieve either for Sita or for Rama, O Son of Raghu. Take courage, O Prince."
Hearing this remarkable speech of the charioteer's, Lakshmana experienced unsurpassed felicity and cried out, "Excellent! Excellent!"
Meantime while Lakshmana and the charioteer were thus conversing on the way, the sun set and they halted on the banks of the Keshini River.