Having passed the night by the Keshini, Lakshmana, the Joy of the House of Raghu, rose at dawn and continued on his way.
At noon, that Prince of the Great Car entered the opulent Qty of Ayodhya, crowded with happy people. The extremely sagacious Saumitri, however, became exceedingly apprehensive, reflecting "On mine arrival, when I fall at Rama's feet, what shall I say to him?" As he was thus anxiously pondering, Rama's residence, bright as the moon, rose before him, and the prince, dismounting at the door of die palace, his heart contracted, with bowed head entered without hindrance. Seeing his elder brother, Rama, seated on his throne in deep distress, Lakshmana's eyes were filled with tears and, seizing hold of his feet, his soul afflicted, with great reverence he offered obeisance to him and addressed him in plaintive accents, saying:—
"In accord with your command, O Lord, I left the daughter of Janaka on the banks of the Ganges near the splendid retreat of the Sage Valmiki, following the counsel given to me. It is there at the entrance of the hermitage that I abandoned the chaste Sita and have returned to serve you. Do not grieve, O Foremost of Men, it has been decreed by destiny. Assuredly those like you, who are intelligent and wise, do not give way to despair. All growth ends in decay, those who rise high, fall, and all meetings end in separation; death is the end of life. Therefore in regard to sons, wives, kinsfolk and wealth, detachment should be practised, for separation from them all is certain. You who art able to control the spirit by the spirit and the mind by the mind and all the worlds, O Kakutstha, how much more art you able to control grief. Nay, nay, in similar circumstances, the foremost of men, like thyself, do not distress themselves. Assuredly you will be censured anew, 0 Raghava, for giving way to grief on account of calumny. Undoubtedly the people will condemn you. O Best of Men, you who art so well endowed with firmness of purpose, give up this faint-heartedness and cease to grieve."
Hearing the words of the magnanimous Lakshmana, the son of Sumitra, Kakutstha, beloved of his friends, answered him in cheerful tones, saying:—
"It shall be as you sayest, O Best of Men, O Valiant Lakshmana, I am gratified by the execution of my behests, O Hero. O Gentle Prince, my distress has been assuaged by your felicitous words; I shall be guided by them, O Saumitri."