Hearing Lakshmana's remarkable speech that filled him with amazement, Rama replied:—
"Assuredly it would be difficult in these times to find a relative like you, O Dear Brother! O You who bearest auspicious marks, who art gifted with intelligence and art one with me in thought, now learn all that is passing in my heart and, knowing it, do what I command you.
"O Dear Saumitri, four days have gone by since I concerned myself with the interests of my people and my soul is tormented; now call together my subjects, the family priests and also the ministers with all those to whose affairs attention must be given! The king who does not fulfil his duties in regard to his people each day, undoubtedly falls into the darkest hell.
"It is related that formerly a monarch named Nriga reigned, who was illustrious, truthful, pure-hearted and devoted to the brahmins. Once at the time of a sacred pilgrimage to Pushkara, that monarch bestowed on the brahmins hundreds and thousands of kine with gilded horns, accompanied by their calves.
"And it came about that one cow with its calf, belonging to a poor brahmin, was accidentally given away and he, hungry and thirsty, searched in vain here and there for that cow for a long time. Finally, having reached Kankhala, he observed his cow in the abode of a brahmin and, though in good health, it had grown old. Thereupon that brahmin called the cow by name crying 'Shabali, come' and the beast, hearing him, recognized the voice of that one who was stricken with hunger and followed him.
"Then the ascetic, in whose house the cow had been retained, speedily pursued him and, reaching that Rishi, addressed him in harsh tones, saying 'That cow belongs to me and was given me by the foremost of monarchs; it was Nriga who bestowed her on me as a gift.'
"Thereupon a great quarrel ensued between those two learned brahmins, and wrangling, they both approached the one who had given away that cow, but though they waited there a long time, they were unable to gain admission to the palace.
Having tarried there many days and nights, they became greatly enraged and those two illustrious ascetics, furious at not achieving their purpose, uttered the following dreadful malediction:—
"'Since you have refused to grant us audience in order to settle our dispute, do you become a lizard and remain invisible to all beings; in that state you shalt pass hundreds and thousands of years in a ditch; when Vishnu, in human form, descends to earth among the Yadus, whose glory he will enhance, you shalt be liberated from the curse! He shall be named Vasudeva. When the Kali Yuga has come, Nara and Narayana will descend on earth to relieve her of her burden.'
"Having pronounced this curse on the king, the two brahmins fell silent and they both agreed to bestow the cow, who had become old and weak, on another brahmin.
"O Lakshmana, King Nriga is still suffering under that dreadful curse. The folly of not attending to the dispute between contestants is to be attributed to the king. Therefore let all those who have come for reasons of arbitration be ushered into my presence, though a king does not seek the fruit of duty fulfilled. Go now personally and see if anyone seeks audience with me."