Hearing the words of the supremely effulgent Rama, the exceedingly sagacious Lakshmana, with joined palms, replied
"O Kakutstha, it was for a very trivial fruit that the Twice-borns struck down Nriga, that royal Sage, with that dreadful curse like unto the Rod of Yama. O Foremost of Men, what did King Nriga reply to those enraged ascetics when they condemned him to such suffering?"
Thus questioned by Lakshmana, Raghava took up the tale again, saying:—
"O Gentle One, hear what that prince first did when he was struck down by the curse
Learning that the two Sages had departed, the king called together his ministers, citizens and chief priests and, in the presence of his subjects, said:—
"'Hear me carefully! Having pronounced a dreadful curse upon me, the Rishis Narada and Parvata have, with the speed of the wind, returned to the Region of Brahma. Let the youthful Prince Vasu, here present, be installed on the throne to-day. Let artisans construct three ditches, where I shall expiate the curse laid upon me by the brahmins, one proof against the rains, one against the cold and a third against the heat; let this habitation be made comfortable and trees laden with fruit and bushes covered with flowers be planted round about, as also shrubs of every kind to lend shade. The precincts of these ditches should be pleasant and I shall pass the time agreeably there till the termination of my sufferings. Let flowers with a sweet fragrance be sown frequently for half a league on all sides!'
"Having made these arrangements, he installed Vasu on the throne and addressed him, saying:—
"'My Son, be ever fixed in your duty and rule your subjects in accord with the laws of the Kshatriyas. Keep before thine eyes the curse the two brahmins pronounced upon me. Do not grieve on my account, O Foremost of Men. Destiny is just, O My son, it is destiny [i.e., Karma] that has plunged me in this affliction. What must happen will happen; what we must pursue will be pursued; what is to be attained will be attained, whether good or ill, according to the acts of a previous existence. Do not grieve, O My Son.'
"Having spoken thus to his son, the highly illustrious King Nriga descended into the constructed ditch in order to take up his abode there. Having entered that deep hole adorned with precious gems, the magnanimous Nriga suffered the curse that the two brahmins had pronounced on him in their anger."