"At these words of the enraged Shukra [also called Bhargava], the unfortunate Yayati, overtaken by old age, said to Yadu:—
"'O Yadu, My Son, You are conversant with dharma, do you take mine old age upon thyself and give me back my youth so that I may continue to give myself up to various enjoyments. O Foremost of Men, I am not yet sated with pleasures; once I am satisfied, I will resume my senility.'
"Hearing these words, Yadu answered that foremost of monarchs, saying:—
"'You have excluded me from all matters, O King, and deprived me of your proximity, let Puru, who feasts with you, take this upon himself!'
"Hearing the words of Yadu, the king addressed Puru, saying:—
"'O Hero, do you take mine old age upon you.'
"On this, Puru, with joined palms, cried out:—
"'What good fortune is mine! Do you favour me, I am at your command!'
"This response from Puru filled Nahusha with exceeding joy and, seeing himself freed from senility, he experienced an unequalled satisfaction. Thereupon, regaining his youth, he performed thousands of sacrifices and ruled the earth for innumerable years.
After a long time, the king said to Puru:—
"'Give me back mine old age, my Son, that I deposited with you! I placed this decrepitude upon you and that is why I now reclaim it. Fear not, I am pleased with your submission to my will and shall install you as king in token of my satisfaction.'
"Having spoken thus to his son, Puru, King Yayati, born of Nahusha, addressed the son of Devayani harshly, saying:—
"'You are an intractable Rakshasa born to me as a warrior, O You who dost disregard my behests 1 You shalt never be king 1 Since you have set me at nought, who am your sire and your spiritual director, you shalt beget terrible Rakshasas and Yatudhanas! Assuredly, O You of perverse soul, your race shall not intermingle with the issue of the lunar race and will resemble you in conduct.'
"Having spoken thus for the good of his realm, that royal Sage invested Puru with the supreme dignity and himself withdrew to the forest.
"After a long time, when the hour fixed had struck, he went to the Celestial Abode. Thereafter Puru ruled the empire with great equity and glory in the City of Pratishthana in the kingdom of Kashi.
"Yadu however begot thousands of Yatudhanas in the inaccessible City of Durga. In this wise, Yayati endured Shukra's curse in accord with the traditions of the Kshatriyas but Nimi never exercised forgiveness.
"I have related everything to you, let us follow the example of those who accept all, so that we do not fall like Nriga."
As Rama, whose face resembled the moon, was speaking thus, the heavens were spangled with stars and the east became a roseate golden colour as if she had donned a robe covered with the pollen of flowers.
In the clear light of dawn, the lotus-eyed Rama performed the morning rites and took his seat in the council chamber on the royal throne in the company of the brahmins and citizens engaged in affairs of state. And the Priest Vasishtha with the Sage Kashyapa and others well versed in the rules of government, ministers conversant with the law, scriptures and ethics were of the assembly, which resembled Indra's Hall of Justice or Yama's or Kuvera's.
Then Rama said to Lakshmana, who was endowed with auspicious marks:—
"O Saumitri, O Long-armed Warrior, do you go out to the city gate and summon those who have come here as petitioners."
Thereupon, according to Rama's command, Lakshmana, endowed with auspicious marks, went to the gate and called upon those who had come as complainants, but no one presented himself, for, under the rule of Ramacandra, there was neither poverty nor disease and the earth was filled with grain and herbs. Neither children nor the young nor those of middle age met with death, the kingdom was ruled with equity and there was no adversity. Thus during Rama's administration none was to be seen who was in need of justice.
Then Lakshmana, with joined palms, said to Rama:—"None has come as complainant," whereupon Rama, with a delighted heart, answered:—
"Do you go once more, O Saumitri, and see if any presents himself! Under royal decree, unrighteousness must not prevail. Though laws inaugurated by me protect my subjects from harm, like the arrows I discharge, yet, O Long-armed One, do you engage thyself in vigilance on their behalf."
Thus addressed, Lakshmana went forth from the palace and observed a dog sitting at the gate. Fixing its gaze steadfastly upon him, that dog was howling unceasingly and the valiant Lakshmana, beholding it in that plight, said:—
"0 Fortunate One, what has brought you hither, speak without fear?"
Hearing the words of Lakshmana, the dog replied:—
"I wish to communicate something to Rama of imperishable exploits, who is the refuge of all beings and who confers fearlessness on all."
Hearing the dog's words, Lakshmana entered the beautiful palace to inform Rama and, having reported the matter to Ramacandra, he went out and said to the dog:—
"If you have anything true to say then come and inform the king!"
Hearing the words of Lakshmana, the dog said:—
"Since we are vilely born, we may not enter the temple of a God, the palace of a king or the abode of a brahmin, nor may we go where there is fire, Indra, the sun or the wind! The king is the personification of virtue; Shri Ramacandra is truthful, well versed in the science of warfare and is ever engaged in the welfare of all beings; he is perfectly cognisant of the time and place to exercise the six qualities, a master of ethics, omniscient, all-seeing and is the delight of his subjects. He is the moon, the sun, Agni, Yama, Indra, Kuvera and Varuna. O Saumitri, do you go and communicate to the king, the protector of his subjects, that without his permission I may not enter."
Thereupon the highly effulgent and noble-minded Lakshmana went into the palace and said to Rama:—
"O Long-armed One, the enhancer of Kaushalya's joy, I have carried out your behests and shall relate everything to you, hear me! As a petitioner, a dog is at the gate awaiting your pleasure."
Then Rama answered, saying:—
"Whosoever it may be, speedily bring him in!"
Hearing the words of Rama, the sagacious Lakshmana immediately sent for the dog who stood before Rama, and he, beholding it, said:—
"Come, communicate what you have to say without fear!"
Thereupon the dog, whose skull was gashed, said:—
"The king is the protector of animals and their lord! He is awake when others sleep; by administering the law, the king protects dharma; without his support, his people perish. The king is the lord, the king is the father of all the world! He is Kala [i.e. Time], He is Yuga [i.e., The World-cycle], He is the creation which comprises all animate and inanimate beings; He is dharma because He supports all, for it is dharma that sustains the worlds, by dharma the Three Worlds are upheld; it is dharma that restrains the wicked; it is for this he is called Dharana [i.e., The Supperter, Upholder]; dharma is greater than all and confers benefits after the death of the body; nought is superior to dharma in the world. O King, charity, compassion, reverence for the wise and absence of guile are the chief virtues that constitute dharma. They who follow dharma are happy in this life and in the next. O Raghava, O You of firm vows, you are the authority of authorities. You are well known for such conduct as is followed by the pious. You are an ocean of good qualities and the abode of righteousness. O Foremost of Kings, if in mine ignorance I have said many things to you, with bowed head I crave your forgiveness; be not angry with me."
Hearing these words from the dog, that were full of wisdom, Rama said:—
"What shall I do for you, speak without fear!"
Then the dog answered:—
"O King, it is by dharma that a king rules, it is by dharma that a king protects his subjects and becomes a refuge, delivering men from fear. Bearing this in mind, O Rama, do you hear me. There is a brahmin named Sarvatha-siddha who lives on alms and who has all his desires satisfied. Through no fault of mine he has inflicted a wound on my head."
Hearing these words, Rama sent forth a messenger who brought Sarvartha-siddha there, and he, beholding Rama in the assembly of those effulgent and leading Sages, said:—
"O Sinless King, for what purpose hast you sent for me?" Then the king answered, saying:—
"O Brahmin, you have injured this dog. What offence did it commit that you didst strike it severely with your staff? Anger is a mortal foe; anger is a sweet-spoken enemy in the garb of a friend; anger is the first of passions and like unto a sharp sword; anger bears away the essence of good; it carries away all that is acquired by asceticism; sacrifices, gifts and charity are all destroyed by anger, therefore it is proper to banish anger by every means. Passion runs wild on all sides like exceedingly wicked steeds. Satiated with all the objects of enjoyment, it is better to govern these appetites with patience. By mind, speech and sight, a man should engage himself in the well-being of others. He should give up aversion and injure no one. The harm that an uncontrolled mind can accomplish is beyond the range of a sharp sword or a serpent that has been trodden underfoot or a foe who has been provoked. Even the nature of one who has learnt humility cannot always be trusted; a study of the Scriptures does not alter the innate character of a man, he who conceals his nature, will reveal his true self at a given moment."
Rama of imperishable exploits, having spoken thus, Sarvatha-siddha, the foremost of the Twice-born, said:—
"O King, wandering about the whole day in search of alms, I became angry and struck the dog. It was seated in the centre of a narrow street and I requested it to move away; thereupon moving with reluctance, it stood by the roadside. O Descendant of Raghu, at that time I was overcome with hunger and struck it for its perverse conduct. I am guilty, O King, do you punish me, O Lord of Monarchs, do you administer correction and I shall be released from the fear of hell."
Then Rama enquired of all his ministers, saying:—
"What shall be done now? What punishment should be inflicted on him? By administrating justice in accord with the crime, our subjects are protected."
Thereupon Bhrigu, Angiras, Kutsa, Vasishtha, Kashyapa and the other Rishis, ministers, leading merchants and Sages conversant with the Shastras, who were present there, said, "A brahmin is exempt from punishment," and the Sages, conversant with the law, having spoken thus, those ascetics addressed Rama, saying:—
"O Raghava, a king is the ruler of all and you above all, for you are the Chastiser of the Three Worlds, the Eternal Vishnu."
They, having spoken thus, the dog said:—
"You didst solemnly enquire 'What shall I do for you?' therefore if you are pleased with me and dost wish to bestow a favour on me, do you appoint this brahmin to be head of the holy assembly of the Kalanjava Monastery."
Thereupon the king instantly sanctioned the appointment, and the brahmin, honoured and gratified, mounted on an elephant, proceeded to occupy his new and dignified status.
At this Rama's counsellors were astonished and said:—
"O You of great effulgence, this brahmin has not been punished, rather hast you favoured him with a boon 1"
Hearing the words of the ministers, Rama said:—•"You do not know the secret of the matter, the dog knows it well!" Thereafter, questioned by Rama, the dog said:—
"O King, I was formerly the head of the assembly of Kalanjava and after worshipping the Gods, feeding the brahmins and feasting the servants, male and female, I used to take my food. I duly administered all things and my mind was untouched by sin. I protected the articles belonging to the tutelary Deities carefully, cultivated virtue, followed dharma and engaged in the welfare of all beings. In spite of this, I have fallen into this wretched state. O Raghava, this brahmin is given to anger and impious, he injures others and is harsh and cruel, he will dishonour seven generations of his race. He will by no means be able to discharge the duties of the head of an assembly.
"He who wishes to see his children, friends and beasts fall into hell, is made chief of the Gods, cows and brahmins! O Raghava, he perishes who deprives the brahmins, women or children of their legitimate possessions; one who misappropriates the offerings of the brahmins or the Gods, goes to the lowest hell."
[Note: This story seems to imply that if a man is appointed to a position of authority and does not discharge his responsibilities faithfully, he is in grave danger in future incarnations.]
Hearing the words of the dog, the eyes of Rama opened wide in astonishment. Thereafter the dog departed from whence it had come.
In its former birth it had been high-minded but was born in a degraded state in that existence. Repairing to the holy City of Kashi, that dog, desiring to leave its body in a sacred spot, thereafter undertook a waterless fast.
For a long time a vulture and an owl dwelt near the City of Ayodhya in a forest on a mountain, that was intersected by many streams, where cuckoos called and which abounded in lions, tigers and birds of every kind.
One day, the wicked vulture alleging that the owl's nest was his, began to quarrel with him, whereupon both said:—
"Let us seek out the lotus-eyed Rama, who is the king of the people and let him decide to whom the nest belongs."
Having thus agreed, the vulture and the owl, wrangling with one another, wrought up with ire, came before Rama and touched his feet. Beholding that Lord of Men, the vulture said:—
"O Preserver of humanity, you are the foremost of the Devas and Asuras, O Resplendent One, in hearing and intelligence you are superior to Brihaspati and Shukracarya. You are conversant with the good and evil karma of all creatures. In beauty you resemblest the moon, in splendour the sun, in glory the Himalaya, in profundity the ocean, in prowess the Grandsire, in forbearance the earth, in speed the wind; you are the Spiritual Preceptor of all animate and inanimate beings and art endowed with every kind of wealth; you are illustrious, forgiving, invincible, victorious and master of all the scriptures and laws. O Foremost of Men, hear my plea! O Lord of Raghu, I had built a nest for myself and this owl is now occupying it as his own, therefore, O King, do you protect me!"
The vulture, having said this, the owl spoke, saying:—
"True it is that in a king, there is to be found a portion of the moon, of Indra, the sun, Kuvera and Yama but there is also a measure of man in him. You, however, art the all-pervasive Narayana Himself, You, impelled by thine own Self dost judge all creatures impartially, yet a certain gentleness is manifest in you and therefore people say you are endowed with a portion of the moon. O Lord, by anger, punishment and reward, you dost remove the sins and dangers of your subjects; it is thine to give and withdraw, you are the dispenser, destroyer and protector and art as Indra to us. In energy you are as fire, irresistible to all creatures and, since you dost spread your lustre on all beings, you are like the sun! You resemblest the Lord of Wealth and art even superior to him, for prosperity resides in you. You lookest on all creatures whether animate or inanimate with the same eye, 0 Raghava, and dost regard foe and friend alike, duly protecting your subjects. O Raghava, those who have incurred thine anger are already slain, therefore you are praised as Yama. O Foremost of Kings, since, in human form, you are merciful and beneficent, people sing your glory, you who art intent on not harming men. The king is the strength of the weak and helpless, the eye of the blind and the refuge of those who seek shelter in him. You are also our Lord, therefore hear our plea! O King, entering into my nest, this vulture is oppressing me; you alone, O Foremost of Men, art the divine chastiser of creatures 1"
Hearing these words, Rama called for his ministers with those of King Dasaratha, Vrishti, Jayanta, Vijaya, Siddhartha, Rashtravarddhana, Ashoka, Dharmapala and the highly powerful Sumantra and others, who were well versed in the law, high-minded and conversant with the Shastras, intelligent, nobly born and skilled in counsel.
Thereafter summoning both, Rama, descending from his throne, enquired of the vulture:—"How long has this nest been made? Tell me if you dost remember it!"
Then the vulture replied:—"From the time men were first born on earth and spread over the four quarters of the globe, I have been living in this nest."
Thereupon the owl said:—
"At the time when trees first covered the earth, this nest of mine was constructed."
Hearing these words, Rama said to his counsellors:—
"That assembly is not an assembly where there are no wise and elderly men, nor those who do not dwell on righteous topics. That religion is no religion where truth is not to be found and that truth is no truth where there is guile. Those counsellors are liars, who remain silent when they are well informed in any matter. He who does not speak either on account of passion, fear or anger, binds himself with a thousand nooses of Varuna and, at the expiration of a full year, is only released from a single sin."
Hearing these words, the ministers said to Rama:—
"O You of great intellect, what the owl has said is true, the vulture has spoken falsely. You are proof of this, O Great King, since the king is the final refuge of all, the root of the people and eternal dharma itself. Those punished by the king do not fall into a lower state, they are saved from hell and expand in virtue."
Hearing these words of the ministers, Rama said:—
"Hear what is related in the Puranas! Formerly the sun, moon and firmament with its stars, the earth with its mountains and forests, the Three Worlds with all that moves and does not move were merged in the waters of the great ocean.
"At that time, Narayana existed as a second Sumeru and, in his belly, lay the earth with Lakshmi. Having destroyed the creation and entered the waters, the highly effulgent Vishnu, identical with the souls of creatures, lay asleep there for many long years. Beholding Vishnu asleep after the destruction of the worlds and, knowing all the entries to be obstructed, the great Brahma entered his belly. Thereupon a golden lotus sprang from Vishnu's navel, and that great Lord, the Creator, Brahma, rose therefrom and engaged in severe penances for the purpose of creating the earth, air, mountains, trees, men, reptiles and all other life-forms from the womb or egg.
"Thereafter, from the wax in the ears of Narayana, two valiant and dreadful Daityas, Madhu and Kaitabha were born. Beholding the Grandsire, they were greatly enraged and rushed upon him, whereupon Brahma, the Self-born cried out loudly.
"Awakened by that sound, Narayana engaged in combat with Madhu and Kaitabha and slew them with his discus and the earth was drenched with their blood. Then, purifying it once more, Vishnu, the Preserver of the World covered it with trees and created medicinal herbs. Thus filled with the marrow of Madhu and Kaitabha, the earth was called Medini. It is for this that I hold this abode does not belong to the vulture but to the owl, O Counsellors, the owl having maintained that he built the nest when trees were first created, that is, before men appeared. This vicious vulture should therefore be punished, for this evil-minded one, having robbed another of its nest, is now oppressing him."
At that moment a voice was heard in the sky, saying:—
"O Rama, do not slay the vulture for it has already been reduced to ashes by the power of Gautama's asceticism. O Lord of Men, this vulture in a former birth was an heroic, truthful and pure king, by the name of Brahmadatta.
One day a brahmin called Gautama, the very personification of Time, came to the house of Brahmadatta for food and said:—
"'O King, I shall feed in your house for more than a hundred years!'
"Thereupon, with his own hands offering that effulgent brahmin water to wash his feet, the King Brahmadatta entertained him with due hospitality.
Once, accidentally, flesh was mixed with the food of the high-souled Gautama and he, enraged, uttered a terrible curse, saying:—
'O King, do you become a vulture!'
"The monarch thereupon replied:—
'O You of great vows, do not curse me thus, be propitiated, it was in ignorance that this offence was offered by me, O Great One! O Blameless One, do you so act that this curse be rendered void 1'
"Recognizing that the offence had been unwittingly committed by the king, the ascetic said:—
"'O King, a monarch shall be born under the name of Rama in the Race of Ikshvaku. O Foremost of Men, you shalt be released from the curse when he touches you.'"
Hearing these words from the sky, Rama touched Brahmadatta and he, giving up his vulture's form, assuming a beautiful body sprinkled with celestial perfumes, worshipped Rama and said:—
"O You conversant with piety, by your grace I have been saved from a dreadful hell, you have verily brought the curse to an end for me!"