As Rama and Lakshmana passed the time conversing thus, the temperate spring night drew on and, when the stainless dawn broke, Kakutstha, having performed his morning worship, went to the audience chamber to attend to affairs of state.
Then Sumantra approached him and said:—
"O King, there are some Sages who are waiting at the gate with Cyavana, the descendant of Bhrigu, at their head; these illustrious Rishis seek audience with you, O Great King, and, eager for your sight, those dwellers on the banks of the Yamuna have sent me to announce their arrival."
Hearing these words, the virtuous Rama, conversant with his duty, said:—"Let those blessed ascetics, whose leader is Bhargava, enter." Thereupon, in deference to the king's summons, the chamberlain, with joined palms, bowing low, ushered in those eminent ascetics, numbering over a hundred, who were blazing in their own effulgence. Thereafter those magnanimous Sages, entering the palace, with their loshtas filled with holy water drawn from sacred places, carried various kinds of fruit and roots as an offering to the king, which Rama accepted with delight.
Then that long-armed prince said to those illustrious Sages:—"Do you occupy these seats according to your pleasure." Thus invited by Rama, those great Rishis took their places on the brilliant golden seats and, seeing them installed, Rama, with joined palms, paying obeisance to them, enquired of them saying:—
"For what reason have you come? In my devotion I would feign know what I may do for you? I am at your command O Illustrious Ones, and shall carry out all you desire with great delight. My whole kingdom and the life in my breast and all that I am is at the service of the Twice-born; this is the truth that I speak1"
Hearing this speech, the magnanimous Rishis of severe penances, who dwelt on the banks of the Yamuna, cried out:—"Excellent!" and with extreme delight, they added:—
"O You, the best of Men, none other on this earth would speak as you have done. Many monarchs, though supremely courageous and powerful, dare not engage themselves in an undertaking when they consider the difficulties; you, however, without even knowing in what the matter consists, in your reverence for the brahmins, dost pledge your word which you will undoubtedly honour. It behoves you to deliver the Sages from a great peril, O Lord."