Such was the speech of the ascetics, and Rama, with joined palms, enquired of them, saying:—
"On what does he live? How does he conduct himself? Where does he dwell?"
Raghava, having questioned them thus, all the ascetics informed him as to how Lavana sustained himself and said:—
"His food consists of all creatures, particularly the ascetics, his manner of life is savage and he constantly roams in Madhu-vana. Having slain thousands of lions, tigers, antelopes, birds and even men, his daily food is their flesh, and that monster, like unto Antaka at the dissolution of the worlds, also devours all beings."
Hearing these words, Raghava said to those great Sages:—
"I shall slay that demon, have no fear." Having given his word to the ascetics of great effulgence, Rama, the delight of Raghu said to his three brothers who were present:—
"Who is brave enough to slay this Asura? On whom shall the choice fall, on the valiant Bharata or the sagacious Shatrughna?"
Listening to Raghava's words, Bharata answered:—"It is I who will slay him 1 Let the task be entrusted to me!"
Hearing Bharata, full of energy and courage, speak thus, Shatrughna, the younger brother of Lakshmana, rose from his golden seat and, bowing before that Lord of Men, said:—
"The long-armed Bharata has already proved his fortitude; let him remain amongst us, O Joy of the Raghus. When Ayodhya was previously deprived of your noble person, Bharata, concealing his sorrow in his heart, ruled the kingdom till the return of his lord. Undergoing innumerable hardships, O Prince, lying on a hard couch in Nandigrama, the supremely illustrious Bharata lived on fruit and roots, his hair matted and clothed in bark. Having endured such a test, that son of Raghu should not have to undergo further trials since I, your servant, am here."
Thus spoke Shatrughna and Raghava said:—
"Be it so, O Descendant of Kakutstha, carry out my commands and I will install you as king in the splendid capital of Madhu. O Long-armed Warrior, let Bharata stay here as you wishest; you are brave and experienced and well able to establish a kingdom with its flourishing provinces and a capital that is washed by the Yamuna, for he who, having destroyed a dynasty, does not install a king, goes to hell. As for you, when you have slain the son of Madhu, Lavana of perverse ways, do you govern his kingdom righteously if you desirest to carry out my wishes. Do not question what I have said, O Hero, the younger brother should undoubtedly obey the elder. O Descendant of Kakutstha, receive the consecration at my hands with the traditional blessings pronounced by Vasishtha and the other brahmins."