These words of Rama filled the valiant Shatrughna with confusion and he spoke with exceeding diffidence, saying:—
"O Lord of Men, these measures do not seem to me to be justified! How may a younger brother be installed when his elders yet live? Still it is imperative that I should submit to your will, O Fortunate Prince, for it would be impossible for me to disregard any order of thine. I have heard from your lips, O Hero, and the scriptures have taught me that one should never oppose the one in authority once he has spoken. My words were ill-advised when I said 'I will slay the redoubtable Lavana in the open field.' This unfortunate utterance places me in a serious dilemma, O Foremost of Men. One should not add anything when one's elders have spoken, for this is a moral taint and, in the next world, proves a cause of retribution. I shall not speak again, O Lord Kakutstha, for fear that a second observation draw punishment upon me. I shall do your pleasure, O Foremost of Men, O Joy of Raghu, but do you so order it that in mine interest this improper act be erased."
Thus spoke the brave and high-souled Shatrughna and Rama, greatly delighted, said to Bharata and Lakshmana:—
"Prepare everything for the installation with care. This very day I shall install that tiger among men, issue of the House of Raghu. At my command, summon the Purodhas, O Offspring of Kakutstha, and the citizens, Ritvijs and ministers."
Hearing the king's command, the great car-warriors, under the direction of the Purodhas, began the ceremony. Thereafter, the lords and brahmins entered the king's palace and the enthronement of the magnanimous Shatrughna was solemnly performed, to the great delight of Raghava and the city.
The fortunate Shatrughna, son of Kakutstha, having received the divine anointing, resembled a second sun, as Skanda when he was formerly enthroned by the inhabitants of heaven led by Indra.
Meanwhile Shatrughna being installed by Rama of imperishable exploits, the inhabitants of the city were highly delighted as also the illustrious brahmins, and Kaushalya, Sumitra and also Kaikeyi, who with the other queens, rejoiced in their royal residence.
Thereafter the Rishis, who dwelt on the banks of the Yamuna, on account of Shatrughna's enthronement, prophesied the death of Lavana.
Clasping the newly crowned one to his heart, Raghava, in caressing tones, thus enhancing his courage, said to him:—
"Here is an infallible shaft that overthrows hostile citadels; by means of this you shalt destroy Lavana, O My Dear Brother, Joy of the House of Raghu. It was fashioned, O Descendant of Kakutstha, when Svyambhu, the divine Ajita reposed on the waters out of sight of the Gods and Asuras, invisible to all beings. That God fashioned this arrow, the foremost of all, in order to slay those two perverse beings, Madhu and Kaitabha, for he was enraged against them, when he desired to create the Three Worlds despite all the Rakshasas.
"Having destroyed Madhu and Kaitabha, for the good of all beings with this marvellous weapon, Brahma created the worlds. I did not loose this dart formerly on Ravana, whom I wished to slay, O Shatrughna, for all creatures would have been greatly diminished thereby.
"As for the superior weapon bestowed on Madhu by the magnanimous Tryambaka for the destruction of his foes, Lavana, while he is ranging the regions in search of his favourite nourishment, leaves it in his dwelling where he honours it in various ways; but when the desire for combat rises in him or he is challenged, that demon lays hold of that weapon and reduces his foes to ashes. O Foremost of Men, ere he returns to the city and while he is without his weapon, place thyself at the entry furnished with your powerful shaft. Before he regains his abode, challenge that demon to combat, O Long-armed Warrior, and you shalt overcome him. If you actest in any other way, you canst not slay him; whereas using these means, O Valiant One, you will exterminate him. You knowest all and how to eschew that weapon of irresistible force belonging to the ancient Shitikanta [i.e., The Lord Shiva]."