Having spoken thus to Shatrughna, the offspring of Kakutstha, and encouraged him again and again, Rama, the Joy of the House of Raghu continued:—
"Here are four thousand horses, two thousand chariots, a hundred selected elephants and stalls furnished with every provision, also singers and dancers. O Foremost of Men, I give you gold and silver coins; take with you a quantity of gold and set out, having furnished thyself with supplies of weapons, food and conveyances.
"By words and gifts, do you satisfy that well-nourished army that is cheerful, contented and disciplined, O Valiant Prince. Where there are neither riches, women nor kinsfolk, devoted servants will not be found, O Shatrughna. Having marshalled your great army composed of people full of ardour, do you go alone, bow in hand to the Madhu Wood. Act in such a manner that Lavana, the son of Madhu, is not aware that you are approaching, seeking to enter into combat with him, that he may be without suspicion; there is no other means of slaying him. O Foremost of Men, he who approaches him with that purpose inevitably perishes under his blows. The summer having passed and the rainy season being at hand, you shalt destroy the wicked Lavana for the hour will have struck!
"With the great Rishis at their head, send the troops forward so that they profit by the summer for crossing the waters of the Jahnavi. There you should take care to encamp the whole army on the river and you, who art fleet of foot, should go ahead with your bow. Halt at the place indicated to you and establish the camps without obstruction so that no-one may have cause for complaint."
Having thus issued his orders and marshalled his army, Shatrughna circumambulated Rama, bowing to him, with joined palms, and in great humility, paid obeisance to Bharata and Lakshmana as also the family priest, Shri Vasishtha.
Having received permission from Rama to depart, that hero, the Scourge of His Foes, circumambulated him and went away. Ordering his army, comprising innumerable elephants and well-bred steeds to advance, that descendant of Raghu took leave of the king and set out on his mission.