Whilst Cyavana was recounting this story and all were wishing him an overwhelming victory, the night speedily passed away for the magnanimous Shatrughna.
Meantime as the cloudless dawn broke, the bold Rakshasa set out from the city eager to find food and, during this time the intrepid Shatrughna crossed the Yamuna and, bow in hand, took up his position at the gate of Madhupura.
At noon, that Rakshasa of evil karma returned laden with countless living beings and, beholding Shatrughna standing at the gate with his weapon, the demon enquired of him:—
"What will you do with that weapon? In my wrath, O Least of Warriors, I have devoured thousands of men like you with their weapons; it is death that brings you here. I am not yet fully fed, O Vilest of Men, why hast you come to cast thyself into my mouth, you fool!"
Thus did he speak, laughing loudly, and the courageous Shatrughna shed tears of rage and, in his fury, sparks of fire issued from all his limbs. Thereafter, in a transport of anger, he said to that ranger of the night:—
"I shall enter into single combat with you! I am the son of Dasaratha, the brother of the sagacious Rama, my name is Shatrughna, a veritable Shatrughna, and it is my desire to slay you that has brought me hither! I wish to fight with you, therefore be on your guard! You are the enemy of all beings; you shalt not escape me alive!"
At these words die Rakshasa, sneering, answered the prince, saying:—
"It is my good fortune that has brought you to me, O Insensate One. Rama slew my maternal aunt's brother, Ravana, on account of a woman, O Wretch. O Lord of Men, I have suffered the entire destruction of Ravana's family and it is because I have neglected to avenge them that you are overconfident. I shall exterminate you all, O Vilest of Men, I shall sweep you all away like straws, both those who are already born and those still to be born. O You of vicious intellect, I accept your challenge! Stay but a moment till I fetch my weapon, one suited to your destruction!"
Thereupon Shatrughna instantly answered saying:—
"What, shalt you escape me alive? He who has any wit does not allow a foe to go free who has come forth of his own accord. He, who, in his stupidity, suffers a foe to escape, perishes. Look long on the world, for, with my whetted shafts, I shall despatch you to Yama's abode, you the enemy of the Three Worlds and of Raghava."