At these words from the mighty Shatrughna, Lavana fell into a violent rage and cried out:—"Stay", striking his hands together and grinding his teeth, thereafter assailing that Lion of the Raghus with redoubled blows.
Thereupon Shatrughna, the Slayer of His Foes, answered Lavana of formidable aspect, who had addressed him thus, saying:—
"When others were slain by you, I was not yet born, but to-day, pierced by my darts, do you enter the region of Yama! May the Rishis and learned brahmins this day be witness of your death in combat, O Wretch! When my shafts have consumed you in the fight, you who art a ranger of the night, the city and the country too will be at peace. As the rays of the sun penetrate the lotus, so shall the dreadful pointed arrows, loosed by mine arm, pierce your heart."
Then Lavana, beside himself with anger on hearing these words, hurled a great tree on Shatrughna striking his breast, but he severed it into a hundred pieces, and the Rakshasa, finding himself foiled, seized hold of a large number of trees and hurled them on his adversary; then Shatrughna, burning with ardour, severed those innumerable trees, one by one, with three or four well-seasoned crescent-shaped arrows and, thereafter, he let a shower of darts fall on the valiant Rakshasa without causing him to retreat. With a mocking laugh, Lavana, brandishing a tree, struck the head of that hero so that he fell insensible, and when that warrior fell, a great cry of "Ah! Ah!" arose from the Rishis, Devas, Gandharvas and also Apsaras.
Thereupon the Rakshasa, thinking Shatrughna to be slain, did not enter his house, though the opportunity presented itself and, seeing him lying on the earth, he did not go in search of his trident, but, reflecting, "He is dead," he began to collect his food.
Shatrughna, however, regaining his senses, in an instant took hold of his weapon and went to his place at the city gate once more, amidst the acclamations of the Rishis; and he selected a celestial, infallible and marvellous arrow that illumined the ten regions with its brilliance and resembled lightning in its velocity. That shaft, smeared with sandalpaste of the colour of blood, wonderfully plumed, was greatly feared by the leaders of the Danavas, the mountains and also the Asuras, and, beholding that dreadful weapon, flaming like Time at the end of the world period, all beings were seized with terror. Then Devas, Asuras, Gandharvas and troops of Apsaras and the whole universe trembled and took refuge with the Grandsire of the worlds. Thereafter the Gods, beside themselves with fear, enquired of that Lord of Lords, the Bestower of Grace, the Grandsire of the Worlds, whether the universe were about to be destroyed. Hearing them speak thus, Brahma, the Grandsire, addressed them in soothing accents, that restored their serenity, saying:—
"Hear me, O You Gods, it is in order to destroy Lavana in combat that Shatrughna is armed with that weapon. O Foremost of the Gods, all are overwhelmed by the power of this eternal weapon forged by the primeval God, the Creator of the World. O My Children, that effulgent shaft which causes such terror was fashioned for the destruction of the demons, Madhu and Kaitabha, by the magnanimous God, Vishnu, who alone understands it. In reality, it is the primeval form of Vishnu Himself, therefore go and witness the death of the foremost of the Rakshasas, Lavana, under the blows of that valiant warrior, the younger brother of Rama."
At these words of that God of Gods, the Devas went to the place where the combat between Shatrughna and Lavana was in progress and that weapon of celestial effulgence, which Shatrughna held in his hand, appeared to all beings like the Fire that blazes forth at the dissolution of the worlds!
Beholding the firmament filled with the Celestial Host, the descendant of Raghu emitted a leonine roar and, thereafter, looked on Lavana again and again. On this renewed provocation from his adversary, the Rakshasa, enraged, stretched his bow up to his ear and that most skilled of archers discharged his great arrow on the breast of the enemy, that piercing it, entered the lower regions. Having penetrated into Rasatala itself, the celestial weapon, honoured by the Gods, immediately returned to that hero, the Joy of the Ikshvakus, and, pierced by Shat-rughna's arrow, Lavana, that ranger of the night, fell like a mountain struck by lightning.
Thereafter, Lavana being slain under the eyes of the Gods, the mighty celestial trident returned to Rudra. When, with a single shaft, that hero of the Raghus destroyed the terror of the Three Worlds with his bow and marvellous arrow, he resembled that orb of a thousand rays which dispels the darkness.
Then the Devas, great Rishis, Pannagas and Apsaras cried out in chorus:—
"By good fortune, the son of Dasaratha has triumphed; fear is banished and, like a great reptile, Lavana lies stretched on the earth."