Lavana being slain, the Gods with their leaders, led by Agni, spoke to Shatrughna in affectionate terms, saying:—
"By good fortune, O Dear Child, you are victorious; by good fortune, Lavana the Rakshasa is destroyed! O Lion among Men, O Pious One, do you ask for a boon. The distributors of boons, those who desired your triumph, are assembled here, O Long-armed Warrior, let not our presence prove fruitless 1"
Hearing these words of the Gods, that long-armed warrior, Shatrughna, placing his joined palms to his forehead, answered humbly:—
"That I may enter into possession of this ravishing and picturesque city, constructed by the Gods, is my dearest wish!"
Then the Celestials answered with delight, "Be it so! this charming city shall assuredly become Shurashena!"
At these words the high-souled Celestials returned to their abode; the valiant Shatrughna, however, summoned his army that was encamped on the banks of the Yamuna and the troops immediately came to that place, having learned of his victory, and he established himself there in the month of Shravana.
The inhabitants of that region of celestial aspect lived there for twelve years in peace and happiness, and the fields abounded in grain. Under the aegis of Shatrughna's arms, Indra sent rain in the proper season and the city was full of healthy and happy people. That capital had the brilliance of the crescent moon and rose in splendour on the banks of the Yamuna; and it was magnificent with its buildings and squares, markets and highways and the inhabitants who belonged to the four castes.
Shatrughna had embellished the magnificent and vast edifices that Lavana had formerly constructed and painted in various colours. Parks and places of entertainment were to be found in all parts of that city, which was also adorned with works of art both human and divine. Of a celestial aspect, it was filled with different kinds of merchandise, and traders from every country came there. Looking on that opulent city, Shatrughna, the younger brother of Bharata, at the height of prosperity and happiness, experienced supreme satisfaction.
After twelve years while he yet dwelt in that enchanting abode, the thought came to him, "I desire to behold Rama again," thereupon, while residing in that city full of people of every condition, the prince resolved to look on the feet of the Chief of the Raghus once more.