Now in the twelfth year, Shatrughna, with a small escort of servants and soldiers, desired to return to Ayodhya where Rama reigned. Having dissuaded his leading counsellors and chief warriors from accompanying him, he set out on his most excellent steed with a hundred chariots.
That descendant of Raghu, having covered fifteen stages (of the journey) reached Valmiki's hermitage where he halted. Thereafter that foremost of men paid obeisance to the ascetic, who, as host, with his own hands offered him water to wash his feet and the Arghya. Then the Sage recounted the most agreeable and varied traditions to the magnanimous Shatrughna and, speaking of the death of Lavana, he said:—
"You have accomplished a difficult feat in slaying him! O Valiant Youth, many mighty monarchs with their troops of infantry and cavalry succumbed in their struggle with Lavana. You have slain him as it were in sport, O Foremost of Men! By your valour, the fear of the worlds has been terminated. The death of Ravana was brought about with great difficulty by Rama, but this marvellous feat of arms has been accomplished by you without any trouble whatsoever! At the fall of Lavana, great joy broke out amongst the Celestials and happiness now reigns amidst all beings in the whole world, O Prince of the House of Raghu! Being present in Vasava's assembly, I witnessed your combat, and my heart too was filled with a keen felicity; now by smelling the crown of your head, I testify to the great affection I bear for you."
With these words, the illustrious Valmiki smelt the crown of Shatrughna's head and offered him and his followers the traditional hospitality.
Having eaten, Shatrughna, the foremost of men, listened to the sweetest chants which told the history of Rama and how all had taken place. Stringed instruments accompanied the singing in the triple mode [i.e., That is sung from the heart, throat and head] which was expressive and melodic; and he heard the story of Rama and what had formerly been achieved by him; his imperishable exploits as they had taken place in time gone by, and that foremost of men, Shatrughna, was transported, his eyes full of tears, and he remained absorbed, sighing again and again. It seemed to him that this song made the past live once more, and Shatrughna's companions, overcome, listened to the enchanting symphonic poem with bowed heads.
Thereafter, those warriors cried out, "Wonderful!" and began to question each other, saying:—
"What is this? Where are we? Is it a vision or a dream? Are we seeing that marvellous epic in a dream?" In their extreme astonishment, they said to Shatrughna:—
"O Prince, do you interrogate Valmiki, that foremost of Sages," for they were all struck with amazement, but Shatrughna answered them, saying:—
"O You Soldiers, it is not fitting to interrogate such a person. Many miracles take place in this hermitage, nevertheless, it does not become us to question a great ascetic out of curiosity."
Having spoken thus to his troops, the son of Raghu paid obeisance to that illustrious Rishi and entered his own quarters.