Though that lion among men had laid himself down, he was unable to sleep and his mind was absorbed in the marvellous epic of Rama, and while he listened to those ravishing strains accompanied by stringed instruments, the night passed quickly for the magnanimous Shatrughna. The night being over, that prince, having performed his morning devotions, with joined palms addressed the foremost of ascetics, saying:—
"O Blessed One, I desire to behold the one who is the Joy of the Raghu Race and crave permission to take leave of you and the other acetics of rigid penances."
Hearing the petition of Shatrughna, the Scourge of his Foes, offspring of the Raghu Race, Valmiki embraced him and granted him permission to depart. Thereupon that prince, having paid obeisance to the foremost of the ascetics, ascended a magnificent chariot and, in his eagerness to see Rama, soon reached Ayodhya.
Having entered that charming city, the long-armed and fortunate descendant of the Ikshvakus sought out Rama of great renown and beheld him seated amidst his counsellors, his countenance as radiant as the full moon, and he resembled the Thousand-eyed God surrounded by the Immortals.
Paying obeisance to the resplendent and magnanimous Rama with joined palms, he addressed that hero, whose prowess was truth, saying:—
"O Great King, all that you have commanded has been carried out by me; the wicked Lavana is dead and his city is occupied. Now twelve years have been passed far from you, O Joy of the Raghus, and I can no longer live separated from you, O Prince. Be gracious to me, O Kakutstha, you whose valour is immeasurable; do not ask me to remain there longer like a calf separated from its mother."
As he spoke thus, Kakutstha embraced him and said:—
"Do not give way to despondency, O Valiant One, such conduct is not worthy of a warrior. Kings do not withdraw to foreign lands, O Raghava, the duty of a king is the protection of his people. O Virtuous Shatrughna, do you visit me from time to time in Ayodhya, then you must return to your capital. I too cherish you more than life itself yet it is essential to look to the security of your kingdom. Meantime remain here with me for seven days, O Kakutstha, and thereafter return to Madhura with thine escort of servants and cavalry."
Hearing Rama's words that were pleasing to the heart and in conformity with dharma, Shatrughna answered sorrowfully, "So be it!"
Thereafter, having passed a week in Rama's proximity, that skilful archer, Shatrughna, in accord with his brother's will, made preparations to depart. Paying obeisance to that true hero, the magnanimous Rama, and to Bharata and Lakshmana, he ascended his chariot and, being accompanied for a great distance by Lakshmana and Bharata, he hastened to regain his capital.