The piteous lamentations of that unfortunate brahmin reached the ears of the king and he, in the profound distress he experienced, called together his ministers, Vasishtha and Vamadeva, with his brothers and the elders of the city also.
Then eight brahmins were ushered into the king's presence by Vasishtha, who resembled a God, and they said:—
"May prosperity attend you!"
Thereafter those foremost of the Twice-born, Markandeya, Maudgalya, Vamadeva, Kashyapa, Katyayana, Javali, Gautama and Narada took their seats, and those Rishis being assembled, Rama paid obeisance to them with joined palms. Then the ministers and citizens received a cordial welcome, as was fitting, and all those highly effulgent persons being seated near him, Raghava informed them of the reproaches of that Twice-born One.
Hearing the words of the prince, who was filled with distress, Narada himself made this memorable reply in the assembly of the Sages:—
"Learn, O King, what has caused the untimely death of this child 1 When you are conversant therewith, do what you considerest to be your duty!
"O Prince, Joy of the Raghus, formerly in the Krita Yuga, the brahmins alone practised asceticism; he who was not a brahmin in no wise undertook it. At the close of that age, all was consumed and absorbed into Brahman. Thereafter the brahmins were re-born enlightened and endowed with the gift of immortality. In that age, none died prematurely and all were wise.
"The Treta Yuga followed when the sons of Manu were born [i.e., The Kshatriyas or Warrior Class], who practised austerities; these noble men were the rulers, and full of power and heroism. In that era, Brahmins and Kshatriyas were equal in power nor could any distinction be found amongst them; it was then that the four castes were established.
"When that Yuga, which had been free from nescience, was consumed in the Fire, unrighteousness placed one foot on the earth and, on account of wrong-doing, glory waned and the span of life was diminished, O Best of Monarchs. Flesh that had been formerly eaten, became impure food throughout the whole world and, in these conditions, men gave themselves up to good deeds, taking refuge in purity and justice to rid themselves of evil.
"In the Treta Yuga, brahmins and warriors practised asceticism and the rest were under the supreme obligation of obedience, proper to the Vaishya and Shudra classes; the Shudras' duty being to serve the other three.
"O Great King, in the Dvapara Yuga, untruth and evil increased, unrightousness having placed a second foot on the earth, and then the Vaishyas began to practice penance, so that dharma, in the form of asceticism, was performed by the three castes, but the Shudras were not permitted to undertake it during that time, O Foremost of Men.
"O Prince, a man of the lowest caste may not give himself up to penance in the Dvapara Yuga; it is only in the Kali Yuga that the practice of asceticism is permitted to the Shudra caste. During the Dvapara Yuga it is a great crime for one of Shudra birth to perform such practices.
"At this time, in thine empire, a rigid penance is being undertaken by a wretched Shudra, 0 Prince, and this is the cause of the death of that child.
"The practice of unrighteousness, be it in the city or the country, brings about misfortune and the monarch who does not mete out an immediate punishment, goes to hell, of this there is no doubt.
"An act of mortification that is prescribed is well done and a sixth of the merit goes to the king who rules with justice. But how should he, who does not protect his people, enjoy the sixth portion? O Lion among Men, you should investigate the happenings in your kingdom and put down evil wherever it is practised, so righteousness may flourish, man's life be prolonged and the child be revived."