Hearing the nectar-like words of Narada, Rama was delighted and said to Lakshmana:—
"O Dear Friend, you who art faithful to your vows, go and console that leading brahmin and cause the body of the child to be placed in a jar of oil with precious unguents and fragrant salves so that it is covered and does not suffer decomposition. Act in such a way that the body of the child does not dissolve or decay."
Having issued this command to Lakshmana, who was endowed with auspicious marks, the highly illustrious Kakutstha thought of Pushpaka, and said "Come hither!" Conscious of his intention, the golden chariot [i.e., The golden chariot that is the presiding Deity of Pushpaka] appeared before him in the same hour and bowing, said to him:—
"Behold, I am here at your service, O Long-armed Prince!"
Listening to the gracious words of Pushpaka, Rama paid obeisance to the great Rishis and ascended the chariot. Armed with his bow, his two quivers and his glittering sword, Raghava left the city in the charge of his two brothers, Saumitri and Bharata, and thereafter that monarch directed his course to the western region which he explored on every side; then he went to the northern region bounded by the Himalayas, but found no trace of evil-doing there; later the eastern region was carefully searched by him and that long-armed Prince, from on high in his chariot, beheld people of pure morals there, as stainless as a mirror. Then he, who causes felicity to the great Rishis, ranged the southern region and, on the side of the Shaivala Mountain, a vast lake appeared to him, on the banks of which the blessed Raghava beheld an ascetic practising an extremely rigorous penance, his head hanging downwards.
On this that Prince born of Raghu approached the one who had given himself up to rigorous practices and said:—
"Blessed art you, O Ascetic, who art faithful to your vows! From what caste art you sprung, O You who hast grown old in mortification and who art established in heroism. I am interested in this matter, I, Rama, the son of Dasaratha. What purpose hast you in view? Is it heaven or some other object? What boon dost you seek by means of this hard penance? I wish to know what you desirest in performing these austerities, O Ascetic. May prosperity attend you! Art you a brahmin? Art you an invincible Kshatriya? Art you a Vaishya, one of the third caste or art you a Shudra? Answer me truthfully!"
Then the ascetic, who was hanging head downwards, thus questioned by Rama, revealed his origin to that Prince born of Dasaratha, the foremost of kings, and the reason why he was. practising penance.