Hearing the words of Rama of imperishable exploits, that ascetic, his head still hanging downwards, answered:—
"O Rama, I was born of a Shudra alliance and I am performing this rigorous penance in order to acquire the status of a God in this body. I am not telling a lie, O Rama, I wish to attain the Celestial Region. Know that I am a Shudra and my name is Shambuka."
As he was yet speaking, Raghava, drawing his brilliant and stainless sword from its scabbard, cut off his head. The Shudra being slain, all the Gods and their leaders with Agni's followers, cried out, "Well done! Well done!" overwhelming Rama with praise, and a rain of celestial flowers of divine fragrance fell on all sides, scattered by Vayu. In their supreme satisfaction, the Gods said to that hero, Rama:—
"You have protected the interests of the Gods, O Highly Intelligent Prince, now ask a boon, O Beloved Offspring of Raghu, Destroyer of Your Foes. By your grace, this Shudra will not be able to attain heaven!"
Hearing the words of the Gods, that hero of the region of truth, with joined palms, addressed Purandara of a Thousand Eyes, saying:—
"Since the Gods are gratified with me, let the son of that brahmin be resuscitated! Accord me this, the greatest of all favours! It is on account of my negligence that this child, the only son of that brahmin, has died before his time. Give him back his life! May prosperity be yours! I have promised that I would restore his son to this Twice-born, do not let my words prove false!"
Thus spoke Raghava and the foremost of the Celestials, full of joy, gave him this reply, enhancing his felicity:—
"O Kakutstha be happy! This very day that child has received new life and has been restored to his parents. The child was resuscitated at the instant that the head of the Shudra fell. Be happy! May prosperity attend you! Now let us go, O Raghava, O Foremost of Monarchs, we desire to visit Agastya's hermitage. The hour of consecration is at hand for that great Rishi! O Illustrious Prince, for twelve years, he has lived in the water. O Kakutstha, let us go together to offer felicitations to that ascetic. Do you come and visit the foremost of Rishis also and be happy."
"Be it so!" said the enhancer of the Raghus' joy and ascended the gold-encrusted Chariot, Pushpaka. Meantime, the Gods had left in their vast chariots and Rama followed them without delay to the hermitage of Kumbhayoni.
Beholding those Gods come to meet him, the virtuous Agastya, that treasury of asceticism, paid obeisance to all without distinction and, having received his homage and offered saluta-tations to him, the Gods joyfully returned to their abode with their attendants. When they had departed, Rama descended from the Pushpaka Plane and offered obeisance to that illustrious Rishi.
Agastya, radiant in his own effulgence, returned the salutation of his magnanimous Sovereign, who, having received supreme hospitality, seated himself, whereupon the illustrious Kumb-hayoni of rigid penances said to him:—
"O Foremost of Men, be you welcome! O Raghava, it is my good fortune that brings you here! O Rama, you are worthy of the highest respect on account of thine outstanding and innumerable attributes, O Prince! You are a guest worthy of honour and abidest in mine heart. The Gods tell me that you have come here after slaying the Shudra and, by this act of justice you have restored the son of a brahmin to life! Pass the night here with me, O Raghava, for you are Narayana, the Blessed Lord and all is to be found in You! You are the divine Purusha! To-morrow at dawn you canst return to the city in the Pushpaka Chariot.
"O My Friend, here is an ornament wrought by Vishvakarma, which is of divine origin and glows by its own light. Be pleased to accept it, O Kakutstha. To give again what one has received is said to be of the greatest profit. You are worthy of this ornament and also of the highest rewards since you have protected the Gods and their leaders. I have therefore a right to offer this to you, do you accept it, O Prince."
[The following fourteen verses are considered to be interpolations].
Then that great warrior of the Ikshvakus, pondering on the duties of the Kshatriyas, answered that magnanimous ascetic, saying:—
"O Illustrious Rishi, only brahmins may accept gifts, it is censurable for a Kshatriya to do so. It is not fitting for a Kshatriya to accept a gift from a brahmin. Do you tell me therefore how I may do so?"
On this, the Rishi Agastya replied, saying:—
"O Rama, O Son of Dasaratha, at the beginning of the Golden Age, the human race had no king, only the Celestials had Vasava as their ruler. To obtain a king, therefore, men approached Brahma, the God of Gods and said:—
"'O Lord, you have made Indra ruler over the Celestials, therefore do you confer a sovereign upon us who shall be the foremost of men; we cannot live without a king, this is our firm conviction!'
"Then the Grandsire of the World sent for Indra and the other Gods and said:—
"'Do you all sacrifice a portion of your welfare!' and the Celestials surrendered part of their power and a king was born, whereupon Brahma named him Kshupa [i.e., A shrub or small tree with roots.]. In his person, Brahma placed an equal proportion of the powers of the Gods and appointed him as ruler of men. By virtue of the portion of Indra's energy, the King Kshupa brought the earth under his control; by the portion of Varuna's energy, he fostered health in his body; by the power of Yama, he ruled the people. O Rama, by virtue of Indra's portion, you are the Ruler of the earth, do you accept this jewel and confer your grace on me."
Hearing the words of the Sage, Rama accepted the brilliant and celestial gem sparkling like the rays of the sun and, having taken that excellent ornament, Dasarathi enquired of the great Sage Kumbhayoni, saying:—
"Whence hast you obtained this divine ornament of celestial workmanship? Who has given it to you, O Brahmin, I ask you out of curiosity, You are an ocean of marvels!"
Then Agastya answered:—
"Hear, O Rama, how I obtained this ornament in the Treta-Yuga."