"O rama, formerly in the Treta-Yuga, there was a vast wilderness some four hundred miles in extent where there was neither beast nor bird and there I was undergoing a rigid penance. O My Friend, I began to range that uninhabited solitude! I cannot describe its beauty with the fruits, roots of exquisite savour and the trees of varying essences.
"In the centre was a lake some four miles in extent, abounding in swans and waterfowl, Cakravakra birds being its ornament. It was covered with lotuses and waterlilies, no weed or moss grew there and its waters were deep, tranquil and sweet. Near that wonderful lake, I found a spacious hermitage which was of great antiquity and devoid of man or beast. It was there I spent a summer night, O Foremost of Men. At dawn, I rose to perform my morning devotions and directed my steps to the lake. There I beheld a dead body, plump and spotless, shining in splendour in the water. This sight caused me to reflect awhile, O Raghava, and I stood on the banks of the lake asking myself, 'What can this be?'
"O Lord, a moment later a wonderful celestial chariot came into view, which was magnificent, and harnessed to swans that were as swift as thought. In that chariot I beheld a man of extraordinary beauty, O Joy of the House of Raghu, who was surrounded by thousands of Apsaras adorned with celestial ornaments. Some were singing enchantingly whilst others played on musical instruments such as Mridangas, Vinas and Panavas; some were dancing and some, with the aid of Chan-waras gleaming like the moon's rays, possessing ornate handles, were fanning the face of that lotus-eyed youth. Then he, who was as radiant as the peak of Mount Meru, leaving his seat, descended from the chariot and, under my gaze, devoured that corpse. Having satisfied his hunger with abundant flesh, he plunged into the waters and after washing his hands and rinsing his mouth according to tradition, he re-ascended his chariot.
"Beholding that heavenly being about to depart, I spoke to him thus, O Prince:—
"'Who art you who resemblest a God? Why hast you partaken of this forbidden flesh, O My Friend? Tell me how does this loathsome nourishment benefit you, O You who art the equal of the Celestials? There is some mystery in this, O Friend, I wish to know what it is; I cannot believe a corpse to be fitting food for you.'
"Thus, out of curiosity, in friendly accents, did I speak to that Nakin, O Prince and having listened to me, he told me all."