"Having listened to these auspicious words, that Celestial Being, with joined palms answered me in this wise, O Rama, Joy of the House of Raghu.
"'Hear, O Brahmin, of what happened to me formerly, bringing about my felicity and also my suffering. Learn of the inexorable fate about which you have questioned me.
"'In times gone by, my illustrious Sire, the mighty Sudeva reigned over the Vidarbhas. He had two sons by his two queens, O Brahmin, I was named Shveta and my younger brother Suratha. My father having ascended to heaven, I was installed as king by the people, and accordingly applied myself to rule with equity.
"'A thousand years passed whilst I governed the empire piously and protected my people according to dharma. Knowing by certain indications that I was ageing, O Foremost of the Twice-born, I reflected on the laws of time and went to the forest. There I penetrated into an inaccessible grove, where there were neither beasts nor birds, in order to practise penance on the banks of this beautiful lake, having first placed my brother Suratha on the throne as lord of the empire.
"'Near this lake, I gave myself up to severe mortifications and practised austerities for thousands of years in the great forest. This excessively rigid penance caused me to attain Brahmaloka, which nothing transcends. Having ascended to heaven, extreme hunger and thirst assailed me, O Foremost of the Twice-born, whereupon, my mind troubled, I approached the Lord of the Three Worlds, the Grandsire, and said to him:—
"'"O Blessed One, in Brahmaloka one should not be subject to hunger and thirst; from what act of mine does this desire to eat and drink, spring? What should be my food, tell me, O Divine Grandsire?"
"'Then the Grandsire answered me, saying:—
"'"O Son of Sudeva, thine own flesh shall be your savoury nourishment and you shalt feed on it daily. You didst ever nourish your body well when you wast performing an excellent penance. That which is sowed ever flourishes, O Virtuous Shveta. Without making any gifts, you didst practise asceticism; it is on this account that you are subject to hunger and thirst in heaven, which you have attained. Therefore, thine own body that has been well nourished shall be your food in heaven, and it shall be converted into Amrita, but when the great and invincible Rishi Agastya comes to the forest, he will deliver you from this bondage, O Shveta! My Friend, he can save the hosts of the Gods themselves, how much more is he able to save you from the domination of hunger and thirst to which you are subjected, O Long-armed Hero."
"'O Lord of the Twice-born, since the decree of Bhagavat, that Lord of Lords, I have been nourishing myself miserably on mine own body! For innumerable years I have fed upon it without it diminishing, O Brahmarishi, and my appetite is excessive. Do you deliver me from this painful pass; release will not come to me from any other than the Ascetic Kumb-hayoni! O Dear and Excellent Sage, do you accept this gift, may good betide you, accord me this favour! I will bestow gold, possessions, raiment, savoury food and much else besides, as also ornaments on you, O Foremost of Sages, I offer you all that is desirable and all felicity, as the price of my deliverance, O Grant me that grace!'
"Hearing these words of that unfortunate Celestial Being, I accepted the rare jewel in order to save him and, as soon as I received that magnificent gem, the mortal body of that Royal-Rishi melted away. His body being thus dissolved, that Rajarishi experienced supreme satisfaction and joyfully ascended to Svarga. This is why that Celestial Being, who resembled Shakra, gave that divine gem, wonderful to look upon, to me, O Kakutstha."