Having heard Agastya's marvellous story, Raghava, full of reverence and admiration, began to question him, saying:—
"O Blessed One, why are there no wild beasts or birds in this forest where the King of Vidarbha, Shveta, used to practise that rigid penance? Why did that prince enter this deserted and uninhabited wood in order to give himself up to the performance of asceticism; I wish to know all in detail?"
Hearing this question inspired by curiosity, that foremost of ascetics began to speak thus:—
"In ancient times in the golden age, O Rama, the Lord Manu was the ruler of the earth. His son was Ikshvaku, the enhancer of the felicity of his race. Having placed his eldest son, the invincible Ikshvaku on the throne, Manu said:—
"'Become the founder of royal dynasties in the world!'
"O Rama, Ikshvaku promised to follow his injunctions and Manu, greatly delighted, added:—
"'I am pleased with you, O Noble One, undoubtedly you shalt found a dynasty but, whilst ruling your subjects with firmness, never punish any who is without fault! A punishment meted out to the guilty according to the law is instrumental in conducting a monarch to heaven, therefore, O Long-armed Hero, O Dear Child, exercise extreme care in wielding the sceptre, this is your supreme duty on earth.'
"Having counselled his son repeatedly in this wise, Manu joyfully repaired to the eternal abode of Brahma.
"His Sire having ascended to the Celestial Region, Ikshvaku of immeasurable glory reflected anxiously within himself as to how he should create progeny. Having performed many sacrifices and charitable deeds, he was blessed with a hundred sons like unto the offspring of the Gods. The youngest of all, O Descendant of Raghu, was stupid and ignorant nor would he listen to the advice of his elders. On account of his lack of virtue, the king named him Danda, thinking that the rod (Danda) would inevitably fall on him.
"As the monarch was unable to find a province suitable for his son, O Raghava, Conqueror of Your Foes, he carved out a territory for him between the Vindhya and Shaivala Mountains. Danda became king and there built an incomparably beautiful city on that charming site surrounded by mountains. He named that city Madhumanta, O Lord, and chose Shukra Deva of pious practices as his spiritual preceptor. Danda with his Guru ruled over that city inhabited by happy people as the King of the Gods in heaven. That monarch the son of the foremost of men, with the help of Shukra Deva ruled as the great and magnanimous Shakra in heaven under the guidance of Brihaspati."