Having related that story to Rama, the great ascetic, born from a jar, continued:—
"Danda, O Kakutstha, fully self-controlled, continued to rule for innumerable years, overcoming all obstacles. One day, in the delicious month of Caitra, the king went to the ravishing hermitage of Bhargava and he beheld the daughter of that ascetic, who was walking in the woodland glade, and she was unrivalled in beauty on earth so that he was seized with desire.
Pierced by the darts of the God of Love, he approached that youthful maiden and enquired of her, saying:—
"'From whence art you, O Lady of graceful hips? Who is your father, O Beautiful One? Being afflicted with passion, I make these enquiries of you, O Fair Lady?'
"Thus did he speak in his agitation and the daughter of the ascetic answered sweetly:—
"'I am the eldest daughter of Shukracarya of imperishable deeds, know that my name is Aruja, O Foremost of Kings, and I dwell in this hermitage. Do not force thine attentions upon me, O King, for I am a girl still under my father's authority. My Sire is your Guru, O Great Prince, you are the disciple of that magnanimous ascetic; that great Sage will inflict a terrible punishment on you in his wrath. It is for you to act honestly regarding me, in accord with the law of dharma, O Prince. Do you first approach my father and ask for my hand or fearful consequences will follow thine act. In his wrath, my father will consume the Three Worlds themselves, O You of faultless form; if, however, you ask for my hand, he will bestow it on you.'
"Thus spoke Aruja, but Danda, who had fallen under the sway of desire, with joined palms, answered her in his frenzy, saying:—
"'Grant me your favours, O Charming One, do not delay, on thine account my breath is being extinguished, O You of lovely countenance. Having united myself with you, what care I if death or the most terrible retribution follow? Respond to my love, O Timid One, that love that overwhelms me.'
"Speaking thus, he seized that youthful woman roughly in his powerful arms and sated his lust on her. Having committed this monstrous outrage, Danda returned to the unrivalled city of Madhumanta with all speed. Aruja however, sobbing near the hermitage, terrified, awaited her father who resembled a God."