"Having heard what had taken place, the blessed and illustrious Rishi, surrounded by his disciples, returned to the hermitage, tormented with hunger. Like unto the moon that has been devoured by the planet Rahu at dawn and is deprived of its radiance, he beheld the unfortunate Aruja besmeared with dust; and that brahmin, being already consumed with hunger, fell into a transport of rage, so that it seemed he wished to destroy the Three Worlds.
Thereafter he addressed his disciples, saying:—
"'Witness the terrible calamity born of my wrath, like unto fire, that will befall that evil-doer, Danda! The time has come for the destruction of that wretched monarch and his court, he, who has dared to place his hand in the flame of the sacrificial fire, will soon reap the fruit of his evil act! In seven nights, he will perish with his children, infantry and cavalry. Pakashana[1] will destroy the territory of that wretch with a rain of dust for a distance of a hundred leagues in extent. In the kingdom of Danda, in seven days, all things animate and inanimate will perish utterly and everything that grows will vanish entirely under the rain of ashes!'
"Having spoken thus to the inhabitants of the hermitage, his eyes red with anger, he added:—
"'Take up your abode beyond the confines of this region!'
"Hearing the words of Shukracarya, all those who dwelt in the hermitage, left that place to establish themselves elsewhere, and Shukracarya, having spoken thus to that company of Sages, addressed his daughter Aruja and said:—
"'Remain in this hermitage, O Foolish One, and give thyself up to meditation. O Aruja, awaiting the time of your deliverance, enjoy carefree this lake of enchanting aspect four miles in extent! Those creatures that take refuge with you at that time will in no wise suffer from the rain of dust!'
"At the command of the Brahmarishi, her Sire, Aruja, who was overcome with grief, answered; 'So be it!'
"Having spoken thus, Shukracarya found a dwelling elsewhere.
"Meantime the kingdom of that foremost of men with his servants, his army and his chariots was reduced to ashes on the seventh day, as predicted by that interpreter of the Veda. O Prince, that empire situated between the Vindhya and the Shaivala Mountains, its sovereign having ceased to uphold dharma, thus cursed by the Brahmarishi, has since been known as the Desert of Dandaka, O Kakutstha, and the place where the ascetics dwelt became known as Janasthana. I have now replied fully to all that you have asked, O Raghava. The hour for the evening devotions is passing, O Hero; from all directions, the great Rishis with their loshtas filled, having bathed, O Prince, are now worshipping the Sun-god. The sun has withdrawn behind the Astachala Mountains while these learned interpreters of the Veda were reading the Brahmanas together; do you also perform thine ablutions, O Rama."