Following the behest of the Rishi, Rama, in order to perform his evening devotions, approached the sacred lake frequented by troops of Apsaras. Having completed his ablutions and the evening rites, he returned to the hermitage of the magnanimous Kumbhayoni. Thereupon Agastya, for his repast, prepared many kinds of fruits and roots with rice and pure ingredients, and the foremost of men partook of that food resembling Amrita and passed the night there happily.
At dawn, that Subduer of His Foes, the Prince of the Raghus, having performed the morning rituals, approached the Sage before his departure and, paying obeisance to that great ascetic, born from a jar, said to him:—
"Suffer me to return to this retreat, I beg of you! Happy am I to have received the favour of looking on such a great ascetic whom I shall visit again for my sanctification!"
Listening to the words of Kakutstha, wonderful to hear, he, whose vision was righteousness, in great delight, answered:—
"O Rama, O Joy of the Raghus, your speech, brilliantly expressed, is of great eloquence. You thyself art the sanctity of all beings! O Rama, whoever casts a single glance of love on you is purified; he goes to paradise where he receives the homage of the Lords of the Third Heaven; but those who look on you with a malevolent eye are suddenly struck down by the Rod of Death and fall into hell! O Prince, Issue of the Raghu Race, you are the salvation of all beings on earth and those who even speak of you acquire perfection. Do you go in peace! Govern thine empire with equity; you are the path of the world!"
Thus did that Muni speak and the virtuous prince with joined palms, paid obeisance to that ascetic and, having offered salutations to that foremost of Sages and the other Munis, tranquilly ascended the golden Pushpaka Chariot. As he was leaving, the companies of Sages showered blessings of every kind upon him, he who was equal to Mahendra, as the Devas acclaim that God of a Thousand Eyes.
Standing in space, Rama, in his golden Chariot Pushpaka, resembled the moon encircled with clouds. Thereafter, at noon, Kakutstha entered Ayodhya amidst continuous acclamations and, having reached the central court, he dismounted from the car. When the prince left Pushpaka, that magnificent chariot, which coursed wheresoever one willed, dismissing it, he said:—"Go, may good betide you!"
Thereafter Rama issued this command to the doorkeeper who was in the courtyard and said:—
"Go and announce mine arrival to Lakshmana and Bharata, those two swift-footed heroes, and summon them here without delay."