At this command from Rama of imperishable exploits, the guard summoned those two youthful princes and came back to inform his master. Then he, seeing Bharata and Lakshmana, embraced them both and said to them:—
"I have faithfully carried out the task of the excellent Twice-born, now I wish to perform the Rajasuya Sacrifice, which to my mind is indestructible and unchangeable, the support of the law and the destroyer of all evil. Accompanied by you both, who are parts of myself, I wish to prepare for this sacrifice based on eternal dharma, for it is an unwritten duty. It was after performing the Rajasuya Sacrifice that Mitra, the Scourge of His Foes, obtained Varuna-hood by means of this rich offering. Having celebrated that sacrifice according to the tradition which was well-known to him, Soma acquired an imperishable state and renown in the world. Do you therefore tell me what is now best, and considering the matter with me, say candidly what is of the greatest profit for the future."
Thus spoke Raghava, and Bharata, a skilful debator, with joined palms made answer, saying:—
"O Dear Brother, in you the highest sense of duty is to be found! It is in you that the world finds her support; in you, all glory resides, and also immeasurable valour, O Long-armed Hero. All the kings of the earth, and we too, regard you as the protector of the universe, as do the Gods and Prajapati. Children look on you as their father, O Valiant Prince, you have become the salvation of living beings also, O Raghava; how should you perform a sacrifice of such a nature, O Lord, in which the destruction of many royal Houses is involved? Further O King, it means the total annihilation of those warriors who have become the heroes of the earth, which will prove a cause of universal condemnation. O Lion among Warriors, O You whose virtues render you unequalled in power, do not destroy the world that is wholly subject to you."
When Rama heard Bharata speak thus, in words sweet as nectar, he experienced an extreme delight and addressed this benign response to the enhancer of Kaikeyi's joy, saying:—
"I am happy and delighted with what you have said, O Irreproachable Hero, this resolute discourse, in accord with righteousness, that you have uttered, O Lion among Heroes, has preserved the earth! The resolve I made to proceed with the great Rajasuya Sacrifice, I now renounce on thine excellent counsel, O Virtuous Bharata. The wise should never commit any act detrimental to the world. Contrariwise one should be willing to receive good advice even from a child, O You, the elder brother of Lakshmana; I am pleased with your counsel which is wise and considered, O Valiant Prince!"