Having thus described the slaying of Vritra at length, Lakshmana, the foremost of men, continued:—
"The extremely valiant Vritra, who inspired terror in the Gods, being destroyed, Shakra, his slayer, filled with the guilt of brahmanicide, failed to return to his senses and, having taken refuge at the end of the worlds, his mind confused, distracted, he remained there for some time, resembling a serpent that is casting its slough. And the Thousand-eyed God, having disappeared, the whole world was agitated and the earth seemed to be lost, bereft of its humidity, its forests dried up. There were no running waters to feed the lakes and rivers and a great desolation seized all beings on account of the lack of rain.
"Then the Gods seeing the decay of the world, which filled them with distress, began to prepare for the sacrifice according to the words Vishnu had formerly uttered, and all the Hosts of the Gods accompanied by their spiritual preceptors and the Rishis sought out the terror-stricken Indra in his retreat.
"Beholding Sahasraksha assailed by the guilt of brahmanicide, O Foremost of Men, and having paid homage to the Chief of the Gods, they performed the Ashvamedha. O Foremost of Men, thereafter the great Horse-sacrifice took place, which was offered by the magnanimous Mahendra in order to cleanse himself of the sin of brahmanicide, and the ceremony being completed, the spirit of brahmanicide issued out of Indra's body and approaching the Gods enquired of them saying:—'Tell me, where shall be my abode?' and the Gods in delight, answered:—'Divide thyself into four parts, O Evil One!'
"Hearing the words of the mighty Gods, the spirit of brah-manicide did so, varying his habitation, he with whom cohabitation is a disaster, and said:—
"'Restraining egoity and following mine own whim with a quarter of myself I shall inhabit the rivers in flood in the rainy season. With another quarter undoubtedly I shall dwell perpetually in the earth as Ushara [i.e., Saline soil]. I speak the truth! For the third portion I shall live for three nights each month with radiantly youthful women, whose pride I shall humble; with my fourth portion I shall live in those who by false report cause the death of innocent brahmins, O Mighty Deities.'
"Then the Gods answered, saying:—
'O You, to live with whom is a calamity, do as you sayest, accomplish your design 1'
"Full of joy, the Gods then paid homage to Vasava of a Thousand Eyes, who was cleansed of his sin and delivered from his affliction. And Sahasraksha, having been installed on the throne, peace came to the whole world and Indra paid homage to that wonderful sacrifice.
"Such is the pre-eminence of the Ashvamedha Ceremony, O Joy of the Raghus! Do you perform the Horse-sacrifice 1" Hearing these exalting words of Lakshmana, whose charm touched his heart, that magnanimous sovereign, the equal of Indra in strength and prowess, experienced supreme satisfaction.