Hearing of the origin of the Kimpurushis, Lakshmana and Bharata both said to Rama, that Lord of Men, "How wonderful!"
Thereafter the illustrious and virtuous Rama continued the story of Ila, the son of Prajapati, saying:—
"When he saw that all those troops of Kinnaris had departed, the foremost of the Rishis said to the beautiful Ila with a smile:—
"'I am the beloved son of Soma, O Lady of gracious mien, do you look on me with favour!'
"Thus did he speak in that lonely forest deserted by the others, and that gracious and beautiful solitary One answered him, saying:—
"'O Dear Son of Soma, I range where I will, I am at your service, do whatsoever pleases you!'
"Hearing this charming reply, the son of the moon was overjoyed and united himself with her in love.
Thereafter the enamoured Budha passed the month of Madhu [i.e., The month that is part of February and March], that vanished like a moment, in dalliance with Ila, and, the month having expired, that moon-faced one awoke from her couch and beheld the son of Soma given over to the practice of penance in the waters, supportless, his arms upstretched, and said to him:—
"'O Blessed One, I came to this inaccessible mountain with my train of attendants, I do not see them anywhere, where have they gone?'
"Hearing the words of the Rajarishi, who had lost all knowledge of the past, Budha, in order to re-assure him, said in friendly tones:—
"'A great hailstorm overwhelmed your attendants whilst you wast asleep, having taken refuge in the hermitage in fear of the wind and rain. Be happy, banish all anxiety and calm thyself! O Hero, live here in peace, nourishing thyself on fruit and roots.'
"The King, comforted by these words, then made this noble reply, in the distress that the loss of his people caused him:—
"'I cannot abandon my kingdom, though deprived of my servants; I must not delay an instant, O Illustrious Ascetic, permit me to depart. I have an elder son fixed in his duty and extremely illustrious, O Brahmin, his name is Shashabindu; he shall succeed me. Nay, I cannot abandon my consorts and my good servants, O Illustrious Ascetic, do not reproach me.'
"Thus spoke that Indra among monarchs and Budha, who first consoled him, then addressed these astonishing words to him, saying:—
"'Be pleased to remain here; do not grieve, O Mighty Kardameya; at the end of the year I will grant you a boon.'
"Hearing these words of Budha of imperishable deeds, who was conversant with the Veda, Ila resolved to remain there. The following month, becoming a woman, he spent in dalliance with Budha and, thereafter, becoming a man once more, he passed the time in the exercise of duty. In the ninth month the lovely Ila gave birth to a son, the mighty Pururavas and, after he was born, she gave the child into the paternal hands of Budha, whom he resembled."