Having related this history to his two brothers, Kakutstha of immeasurable glory, addressed these pious words to Lakshmana, saying
"Assemble for counsel, Vasishtha, Vamadeva, Javali, Kashyapa and all the brahmins learned in the Ashvamedha Sacrifice. O Lakshmana, I shall loose the caparisoned steed in accord with tradition!"
On this command being communicated to him, Lakshmana, of swift step, assembled all those Sages and ushered them into Rama's presence. When they beheld Rama, who resembled a God, paying obeisance to their feet, they showered blessings upon him. Having performed the Pranjali [i.e., A gesture of respect], Raghava addressed those Sages on the Ashvamedha Sacrifice, in a speech inspired by dharma.
Hearing the words of Rama and having offered homage to the God, whose emblem is the Bull, all those Twice-born praised the Ashvamedha highly, and that eulogy greatly delighted Kakutstha, who seeing them ready to perform the ceremony, said to Lakshmana:—
"O Long-armed Hero, make known to the magnanimous Sugriva that he should come here with his great monkeys and the innumerable dwellers in the woods in order to enjoy this great festival and be happy. Let Bibishana, he who has no rival in valour, come surrounded by his host of Rakshasas, moving where they will, in order to assist me in the great Ashvamedha Sacrifice. Let wealthy monarchs, who wish to render me a service, come in all haste with their retinues to see the place of sacrifice and all the virtuous Twice-born, who have gone to foreign lands, summon them all to the Ashvamedha Sacrifice, O Lakshmana. Invite all the Rishis, those long-armed warriors, mines of asceticism, who live in distant parts with their wives, as also the players on the cymbals, jugglers and dancers.
"Let a vast structure be set up near the Gaumati River in the Naimisha Wood, O Long-armed Warrior, it is pre-eminently a sacred spot. Let propitiatory rites be performed everywhere and hundreds of brahmins, conversant with the law, assist in the Naimisha Wood at this great sacrifice, the highest of all and which is unsurpassed, O Joy of the Raghus. Assemble all the people speedily, O Virtuous Prince, and do not let them depart ill-contented, unsatisfied or without having been loaded with favours according to tradition. O Hero, send out in advance a hundred thousand loads of rice in good condition and an ayuta of sesamum seed and beans as well as chick-peas, lentils, quantities of salt, oil of good quality and innumerable perfumes.
"Let Bharata first carefully furnish a hundred kotis of gold and as much silver, and go before. In the centre, the merchants, all the jugglers, dancers, cooks and women should be ranged, let them be numerous and young in heart; the troops, however, should go in advance with Bharata. Shopkeepers, children, the-aged, the Twice-born in profound meditation, the masons, carpenters, agents and also the mothers and women of the Princes apartments with the golden statue of my consort for consecration, as also skilled sacrifices, should be first assembled by the illustrious Bharata, who will precede them.
"O Prince, he will cause pavilions to be set up worthy of the mighty kings and their suites. Food, drink and raiment should be supplied for those brilliant escorts."
Thereafter Bharata went away followed by Shatrughna and the magnanimous monkeys who surrounded Sugriva, accompanied by the leading priests. Bibishana, at the head of the Rakshasas and women in great numbers, provided an escort for the Rishis of rigid penance.