As this most wonderful sacrifice was proceeding, the disciples of Valmiki, that blessed Sage, suddenly came there and, having witnessed the divine festival, admirable to behold, that company of Rishis constructed some comfortable huts a little way off. Innumerable bullock carts full of provisions, with excellent fruit and roots were heaped in Valmiki's charming grove, and thereafter that Sage said to his disciples, Kusha and Lava:—
"Go, and with great enthusiasm sing the Epic Ramayana, cheerfully and carefully, in the sacred enclosures of the Rishis, the dwellings of the brahmins, along the roads and highways and in the residence of princes, and especially it should be sung at the gate of Rama's pavilion, where the sacrifice is taking place and also before the priests.
"Here are savoury fruits of every kind that grow in the mountainous regions, eat and then sing. You will not experience any fatigue, 0 Dear Ones, on account of these roots and succulent fruits that will preserve the purity of your voices. If Rama, the Lord of the Earth, indicates that you should be heard by the assembled Sages, act accordingly. Each time you will have twenty Sargas [i.e., Chapters or divisions] to sing, which you have previously learnt from me. Above all, do not entertain the least desire for reward! Of what use is gold to ascetics who live on fruit and roots? If Kakutstha questions you, saying 'Who is your Master?' answer the king in this wise, 'We are both the disciples of the great Sage Valmiki!' Sing without fear to the accompaniment of these stringed instruments of a tone unknown heretofore, that you have tuned sweetly. Sing the poem from the beginning without showing any lack of respect to the king, who is the Father of all beings according to the law.
"To-morrow therefore, at dawn, with a cheerful heart and taking care to sing with sweet voices, accompany yourselves on these stringed instruments of harmonized intervals."
Having repeatedly issued these instructions, that ascetic born of Pracetas [i.e., A name of the God Varuna], of noble birth, the illustrious Sage Valmiki, became silent.
On receiving the commands of that Sage, the two sons of Maithili humbly answered "We will act in accord with your behests I" and those Conquerors of Hostile Cities then took their leave.
Those youthful boys allowed the excellent counsels of the Rishi to enter their hearts, as the Ashvins receive the teachings of Bhargava and, eager to put them into practice, they whiled away that auspicious night.