When the night had passed, the great descendant of Raghu went to the place of sacrifice to which he had summoned all the Rishis: Vasishtha, Vamadeva, Javali, Kashyapa, Vishvamitra, Dirghatmas and Durvasa of rigid penances, also Paulastya and Shakti, Bhargava, Vamana, Markandeya, Dhirghayus and the highly renowned Maudgalya, Garga, Cyavana, the virtuous Shatan-anda, the far-famed Bharadvaja, the illustrious Agniputra, Narada, Parvata and Gautama of great glory, all these ascetics and others of austere observances, in great numbers.
Inspired by curiosity, they all assembled, as also the intrepid titans; and the valiant monkeys and kings, intrigued, gathered there in like manner, with the warriors, merchants and thousands of the lower caste. Brahmins of rigid penances arrived from every region and all met together to be present at the taking of the oath by Sita; and that immense multitude stood absolutely motionless, as if turned to stone.
Knowing that all were come, the foremost of Sages immediately approached with Sita following him, her head bowed, her palms joined, choked with sobs, her mind absorbed in Rama.
Beholding Sita walking behind Valmiki, like unto the holy Shruti following in Brahma's footsteps, there arose a great clamour with cries of "Halahala!" from all those who were oppressed with profound sorrow on account of the unfortunate princess. And some cried "Hail, O Rama!" and some "Hail, O Sita!" while the rest acclaimed both. Thereafter, advancing amidst that multitude, the foremost of the ascetics, accompanied by Sita, addressed Raghava, saying:—
"I am Valmiki, and here, O Dasarathi, is Sita of virtuous ways and conduct, who, on account of calumny, was abandoned near mine hermitage, the censure of the people having inspired you with fear, O Virtuous One! Sita will prove her innocence; it is for you to issue the command. These two sons of Janaki, twin brothers, invincible heroes, are your sons also; I speak the truth to you! I am the tenth son of Pracetas, O Joy of the Raghus, I do not recollect ever having uttered a lie; truly these are your two children. During countless years I have practised asceticism, may I never reap the fruits thereof if Maithili be guilty 1 I have nothing wherewith to reproach myself regarding thought, word or deed; if Maithili be guilty, may I never gather the fruits thereof! With my five senses and the mind as the sixth, meditating amidst the forest waterfalls, Sita's innocence was revealed to me. That lady of irreproachable and pure conduct, to whom her lord is a God, will give proof of her good frith, O You who didst fear public condemnation! O Foremost of Men, here is that lady whom I proclaim to be essentially chaste, I whose vision is divinely illumined and who, though she was supremely dear to you and her innocence well known, you didst repudiate when your spirit was troubled by the censure of the people!"