Thus spoke Valmiki, and Raghava, on seeing that fair-complexioned princess, with joined palms, answered in the presence of the assembly:—
"O Fortunate and virtuous Brahmin, may it be so! I fully concur in thine irreproachable words. This assurance was formerly given to me by Vaidehi in the presence of the Gods and, believing in that oath, I reinstated her in my house, but great indeed was the public condemnation, therefore I sent Maithili away. O Brahmin, though wholly convinced of her innocence, it was from fear of the people that I cast off Sita, do you pardon me! I acknowledge these twins, Kusha and Lava, to be my sons! I desire to make my peace with the chaste Maithili amidst the assembly."
Hearing of his intention, the foremost of the Gods, led by Brahma, all assembled there to witness Sita's defence, and Adityas, Vasus, Rudras, Vishvadevas, the hosts of the Maruts and all the great Rishis, Nagas, Sadhyas, Supamas and Siddhas gathered with delight. Beholding the Gods and the Sages, the foremost of men, Raghava, once more affirmed: "I am in agreement with the irreproachable words of the Rishi Valmiki! I wish to be reconciled with the chaste Vaidehi in the presence of this assembly."
The defence of Sita filled all who witnessed it with emotion and, at that moment, Vayu, the foremost of the Gods, sent forth a pure and fragrant breeze to the great delight of the assembly, as formerly in the Golden Age, and, it appeared marvellous to all those people from many lands who experienced it!
Beholding that assembly, Sita, attired in a yellow robe, with joined palms, her head bowed, her eyes lowered, said:—
"If, in thought, I have never dwelt on any but Rama, may the Goddess Madhavi [i.e., The Earth Goddess, also called Dharani] receive me!"
As Vaidehi was still speaking, a miracle took place and, from the earth rose a marvellous celestial throne supported on the heads of Nagas of immeasurable power, their bodies adorned with divine gems. The Goddess Dharani, bidding her welcome, took Maithili in her arms, causing her to be seated on that celestial seat and, while she occupied the throne, a shower of blossoms fell without ceasing from the sky. Then the Gods burst into loud acclamations, crying "Excellent! Excellent! O Sita, your virtue is supreme!"
From the heavens, the Gods, with delighted hearts, beholding Sita descend into the earth, praised her again and again, and at the place of sacrifice, where all were assembled, Sages, kings and the foremost of men were unable to recover from their astonishment. In the sky, on earth and in the nether regions, all beings, animate and inanimate, Danavas of vast stature and the foremost of the Pannagas cried out in delight, whilst others remained absorbed in their thoughts or gazed on Rama and on Sita in ecstasy. The entire assembly witnessed Sita's descent into the earth and, at that moment, a great tremor passed through the whole world.