When Vaidehi had descended into the earth, all the monkeys and Sages cried out in Rama's presence, "Excellent! Excellent" but Rama, deeply distressed, supporting himself on a staff employed in the sacrifice, his eyes veiled with tears, his head bowed, was overcome with grief. Sighing again and again, letting fall many tears, a prey to pain and wrath, he said:—
"Beholding Sita, the personification of Shri, vanish in my presence, my soul experiences an agony hitherto unknown. Formerly, when she was in Lanka, on the further side of the vast ocean, I brought her back, how much more easily shall I be able to wrest her from the bosom of the earth! O Goddess Vasuda, give me back my Sita, whom you retainest, or you shalt witness my wrath 1 You should know me since you are assuredly my mother-in-law and Maithili rose from you when Janaka was following the plough. Therefore let Sita go or open thyself to me that I may dwell with her in Patala or else in Nakaprishtha! Bring back Maithili on whose account I am distraught 1 If you failest to return Sita to me in her original form, I shall plough you up with your mountains and forests and shall destroy you so that nothing but water remains 1"
Thus spoke Kakutstha, full of wrath and grief, and Brahma, accompanied by the Hosts of the Gods, addressed the son of Raghu, saying:—
"O Rama, virtuous Rama, do not be incensed, recollect your divine origin and nature, O Scourge of Your Foes! Assuredly, O Prince, I do not need to remind you that no-one is superior to you! Now recall that you are Vishnu, O Invincible Hero! The chaste and virtuous Sita, who was wholly absorbed in you formerly, has happily reached the region of the Nagas, by virtue of her ascetic practices. You will undoubtedly be re-united with her in the Celestial Realm. O Rama, hear, in the assembly, what I relate in this poem, the most beautiful of epics, recited in thine honour, I will make all known to you in detail, do not doubt it. In this poem of Valmiki all is included from the time of your birth, O Hero, the good and evil that has visited you and what will happen in the future. That great poet, O Rama, is wholly devoted to you, none other is worthy of the honour bestowed by poets save Raghava. Formerly, in company with the Gods, I heard the entire classic; it is divine, marvellously beautiful, true, and the remover of nescience. O Foremost of Men, O Supremely Virtuous Kakutstha, listen to the conclusion of the Ramayana and what concerns the future. Listen now with the Rishis, O Doughty and Illustrious Prince, to the end of this sublime poem entitled 'Uttara'. Assuredly, O Kakutstha, this excellent epilogue may not be heard by any other save you, who art the supreme Sage, O Hero, O Joy of the House of Raghu."
Having spoken thus, Brahma, the Lord of the Three Worlds, returned to his abode with his followers, the Gods.
Meantime the magnanimous and high-souled Rishis, whose abode was Brahmaloka, at Brahma's command, remained, desirous of hearing 'Uttara kanda' and what should happen to Raghava.
Having listened to the significant words of that God of Gods, the illustrious Rama said to Valmiki:—
"O Blessed One, the Rishis of Brahmaloka desire to listen to 'Uttara kanda' and all that shall happen to me; to-morrow let it be narrated by you!"
Having resolved thus, Rama sought out Kusha and Lava and, dismissing the company, returned with them to the leaf-thatched hut of the Rishi Valmiki, where he passed the night lamenting for Sita.