Hearing Hanuman's faithful narrative, Rama, full of joy, said: "The mission that Hanuman has carried out is of great significance and the most arduous in the world; none other could have achieved it, even in thought! Other than Garuda and Vayu, verily I know of no being able to cross the mighty ocean save Hanuman himself. Neither Gods, Danavas, Yakshas, Gandharvas, Uragas nor Rakshasas could enter Lanka which is protected by Ravana and, did any in his presumption enter it, would he return alive? Who is able to capture that citadel by assault, that has been rendered inaccessible by its rampart of titans, but one whose courage and valour are equal to Hanuman's? Hanuman has carried out this important service for Sugriva by manifesting a strength equal to his audacity. That servant to whom his master confides a difficult task and who acquits himself with zeal is said to be a superior man. The one who is ready and capable but who yet does no more than his sovereign exacts from him, in order to render himself agreeable, is called an ordinary man, but he who is well and able and yet does not carry out the command of his king, is said to be the least of men. Hanuman has fulfilled the task confided to him unfalteringly, to the satisfaction of Sugriva; in consequence, through the discovery of Vaidehi's retreat by this faithful messenger, the House of Raghu, the valiant Lakshmana and I have been saved. Yet even so my heart is heavy, since I am not able to requite the bearer of these good tidings in a fitting manner. Let me at least embrace the magnanimous Hanuman since, in the present circumstances, this is all that is permitted to me!"
Having spoken thus, Rama, trembling with joy, clasped Hanuman in his arms, who, master of himself, his mission fulfilled, had returned.
Then the great Scion of the House of Raghu, after reflecting awhile, added in the presence of Sugriva, King of the Monkeys:
"Though the discovery of Sita has been accomplished, yet when I behold that vast ocean, I am plunged in despondency. How will the army of the monkeys be able to reach the southern shore, crossing over that impassable stretch of water? Having received these tidings of Vaidehi, what can now be done to take the monkeys to the further side of the ocean?"
In the anguish that possessed him, the mighty Rama, scourge of his foes, having spoken to Hanuman, was filled with apprehension and became absorbed in thought.