Having listened to the judicious and well-reasoned speech of Hanuman, the illustrious Rama, a true hero, spoke saying:—
"Now that you have told me everything concerning Lanka, that dread citadel of the terrible demons, I shall make preparations to destroy it without delay, this is the truth!
"O Sugriva, be gracious enough to order our departure; the sun is in mid-heaven and has entered the constellation of victory. As for Sita's abductor, he shall not escape, wherever he may go! When Sita learns of my approach, her hopes will revive, as one who, having drunk poison and on the point of death, quaffs the nectar of immortality.
"The northern planet Phalguni is in the ascendent and will be in conjunction with the Hasta Star to-morrow. Let us depart, O Sugriva, and let all the troops accompany us; every portent is favourable! Having slain Ravana, I shall return with Sita, the daughter of Janaka. My right eye-lid is twitching which is an indication that victory is near and that my purpose will be accomplished."
At these words, King Sugriva and Lakshmana, bowing low, paid obeisance to Rama, who, full of faith and versed in the moral law, spoke once more, saying:—
"Let General Nila with a guard of a hundred thousand intrepid warriors go before the army to explore the way. He should lead his forces speedily by the path where fruit, roots, shade, fresh water and honey abound. In their wickedness, the demons are capable of destroying the roots and fruits and vitiating the water on the way. Keep them at a distance and be on your guard! Let those dwellers of the woods search the ravines and dense thickets in the forest in order to discover the ambushes of the enemy.
"Those who are weak should remain here for your task is formidable and demands endurance; therefore let the foremost of the monkeys gifted with prodigious prowess lead the vanguard, composed of hundreds and thousands of monkeys, resembling the waters of the sea. Let Gaja who is like unto a hill and the exceedingly powerful Gavaya and Gavaksha go ahead like proud bulls leading the kine. The leader of monkeys, Rishabha, skilled in leaping, should protect the right flank of the army and the fiery Gandhamadana, resembling an elephant in mustha, should defend the left flank. I myself, mounted on the shoulders of Hanuman, like Indra on Airavata, will march in the centre of my troops in order to encourage them. Lakshmana who resembles death itself, will ride on the shoulders of Angada, as Kuvera, the Lord of Creatures and God of Wealth on Sarva-bhauma. Let the mighty Lord of the Bears, Jambavan with Sushena and the monkey Vegadarshin, all three, protect the rear of the army."
Hearing Raghava's words, Sugriva, commander of the forces, gave his orders to the monkeys. Thereupon a multitude of monkeys, eager to fight, issued from the caves and mountain peaks, leaping on all sides. Honoured by the King of the Monkeys, as also by Lakshmana, the virtuous Rama, accompanied by hundreds and thousands of monkeys resembling elephants, set out in a southerly direction and under Sugriva's command, that great army in high spirits, betraying its delight, escorted him.
Guarding the flanks of the army and pressing forward, they ran towards the south, leaping on all sides, emitting leonine roars, growling and shouting, feeding on honey and delicious fruits, brandishing great trees and flowering shrubs. In their pugnacity, some lifted their fellows up and threw them down or climbed on each others backs vying with one another in turning somersaults.
"We will slay Ravana with all his nocturnal rangers!" Thus did those monkeys roar in the presence of Rama.
Going in advance of the army, Rishabha, the valiant Nila and also Kumuda cleared the way with the assistance of innumerable monkeys. In the centre, the King Sugriva, Rama and Lakshmana, scourges of their foes, were surrounded by countless redoutable warriors. The courageous monkey, Shatabali, at the head of ten kotis, was, in himself, sufficient to protect the entire host of monkeys! With an escort of a hundred kotis, Kesarin and Panasa, Gaja and Arka with their battalions protected the flanks of that army, whilst Sushena and Jambavan surrounded by a multitude of bears, having placed Sugriva at the head, formed the rearguard. The valiant General Nila, a lion among monkeys, who excelled in marching, constantly inspected the ranks, and Valimukha, Prajangha, Jambha and the monkey Rabhasa went about everywhere encouraging the Plavamgamas.
Whilst those lions among monkeys advanced on every side proud of their strength, they beheld the great Mountain Sahya crowned with hundreds of trees and lakes and lovely pools covered with flowers.
Under the command of Rama of searing wrath, skirting the precincts of cities and public highways, that vast and terrible army of monkeys, like the ocean tide, surged forward with a thunderous sound. At the side of the son of Dasaratha, those heroic monkeys bounded forward with agility, like swift steeds urged on by the spur. And those foremost of men, borne on the shoulders of the monkeys, appeared beautiful like the sun and moon, in conjunction with those two great planets, Rahu and Ketu, and honoured by the King of the Monkeys and Lakshmana, Rama accompanied by his army, proceeded towards the south.
Then Lakshmana, mounted on Angada's shoulders, spoke to Rama who was accomplishing his design, in sweet accents, saying:—
"Having regained Vaidehi and slain Ravana her abductor, thus fulfilling your purpose, you will return to Ayodhya, who, too, will be gratified. I perceive auspicious omens in the heavens and on the earth, O Descendant of Raghu, indicating the success of thine enterprise! A favourable wind blows behind the army, that is soft, health-giving and auspicious; birds and beasts emit cheerful and sonorous sounds; all the quarters are serene and the sun shines clearly. Ushanas, Bhrigu's son, too, wears an auspicious aspect for you, and the pole star is unaccompanied by adverse planets, the seven Rishis, pure and brilliant, circumambulating it. Before us shines the grandsire of the high-souled Ikshvakus, the immaculate Trishanku accompanied by his priest; and the twin Vishakas, our racial star, gleam free from obstruction.
"Nairrita, the ruling star of the titans, is badly aspected and in opposition to the rising planet Dhumaketu, presaging the overthrow of the titans. Those about to die, in their last hour, become a prey to Graha. The water of the lakes is fresh and tastes sweet, the woods are laden with fruit, fragrant breezes blow softly and the trees are flowering out of season, O Lord 1 The army of the monkeys looks splendid in its formations, like the Celestial Host at the destruction of Taraka. Surveying the whole scene, O Noble One, you should experience supreme delight!"
Thus did Saumitri speak in gay tones to his elder brother in order to console him and meantime the army of the monkeys advanced, covering the earth. The dust raised by those mighty bears and monkeys, furnished with nails and claws, enveloped the whole earth and the splendour of the sun was obscured. Like a mass of cloud enveloping the sky, that monkey army advanced in solid formation encompassing the southern region. As they pressed on mile on mile, crossing the rivers and streams against the current, they traversed many leagues in one stretch. Resting by lakes of pure water, passing over mountains covered with forests, across plains, through woods laden with ftuit, skirting them or passing through the centre, they went on, covering the entire earth, and their countenances manifesting joy, they ran with the swiftness of the wind.
All those monkeys were zealous in Rama's service, each vying with the other in high spirits, vigour and prowess. Some, proud of their youth and supple limbs, increased their pace, running with extreme speed and executing handsprings and some of those rangers of the woods shouted 'Kila! Kila!' lashing their tails and stamping on the earth whilst others with upraised arms broke off the trees and rocks here and there or climbed to the summit of the mountains like true mountaineers. Emitting loud cries and roaring, they frequently tore down handfuls of creepers with their thighs. In their energy, with their jaws set, some juggled with rocks and trees. It was by hundreds and thousands and millions that these formidable monkeys covered the earth with their splendour; and that great army of monkeys, full of energy, proceeding under Sugriva's orders, eager for battle and anxious to deliver Sita, did not linger even for an instant.
Then Rama, seeing the Sahira and Malaya Mountains with their dense woodlands frequented by various kinds of wild animals and marvellous forests, streams and rivers, went towards them, and the monkeys broke down Champaka, Tilaka, Cuta, Praseka, Sindubaraka, Tinisha, Karavira, Ashoka, Karanja, Plaksha, Nyagrodha, Jambuka and Amlaka Trees, and, seated on those enchanting plateaus, the forest trees shaken by the wind covered them with flowers.
A soft breeze, fresh and perfumed with sandal, blew while the bees hummed in the nectar scented woods. From this mountain, rich in ore, the dust raised by those monkeys enveloped that immense army on all sides.
On the smiling mountain slopes, Ketaka Trees, Sinduvara, charming Vasanti, scented Madhavi, clumps of Jasmine, Shiribilva, Madhuka, Vanjula, Vankula, Ranjaka, Tilaka Nagavriksha, all in flower, with Cuta, Patalika, Kovidara, Muchulinda, Arjuna, Shimshapa, Kutaja, Hintala, Tinisha, Shumakha, Nipaka, the blue Ashoka, Sarala, Ankola and Padmaka Trees bloomed and teemed with monkeys disporting themselves there. Enchanting lakes and pools, frequented by waterfowl, ducks and herons, were to be found on that mountain, which was the haunt of boars, deer, bears, hyenas, lions and tigers inspiring terror, and innumerable venomous snakes infested it. Kumudas, Utpalas and many other flowers embellished the lakes, and flocks of birds of various kinds sang on that mountain side.
Having bathed in those waters and quenched their thirst, the monkeys began to disport themselves and splashing one another, climbing the mountain, they plucked the delicious fruits as fragrant as 'Amrita' and the roots and flowers from the trees. Yellow as honey themselves, they, delighted, feasted on the combs, a 'drona' in size, which were suspended from the trees, and, shaking the lovely branches and letting them spring back again, they tore down the creepers; some drunk with nectar, dancing joyfully as they continued on their way; some climbed the trees, others quenched their thirst and the whole earth, covered with monkeys, resembled a field of ripe com.
Reaching the Mahendra Mountain, the long-armed Rama, whose eyes resembled lotus petals, climbed to the summit adorned with various trees and from that peak, the elder son of King Dasaratha beheld that vast sea with its rising waves full of fish and turtle.
Having crossed the Sahya and Malaya Mountains, the army halted in their ranks along the shores of the sea with its thundering waves. Then that foremost of men, Rama, descended from the heights and accompanied by Lakshmana and Sugriva, quickly entered a lovely wood on the shores of the ocean and reaching that immense strand strewn with boulders, washed by the billowing waves, he spoke thus:—
"O Sugriva, we have reached the abode of Varuna; now we should consider the matter with which we were formerly preoccupied. This ocean, the Lord of Rivers, with its vast expanse, is impossible to cross unless some special course be adopted. Let us camp here therefore and deliberate on the means by which we can transport the army to the further shore."
Speaking thus, that long-armed hero, who had been rendered desolate by Sita's abduction, approached the sea and issued orders for the troops quartering.
"Let the whole army pitch their camp on the shore, O Lion among Monkeys! The time has come to take counsel and devise some way to cross the main; let every leader remain with his forces and, under no pretext whatever, shall he leave them; meantime they should find out if any ambush has been laid by the enemy."
At Rama's command, Sugriva, assisted by Lakshmana, caused his forces to camp on the shore which was covered with trees and the monkey host looked resplendent like a second ocean whose waves were yellow as honey. Reaching that wooded shore those lions of monkeys encamped, eager to reach the further side of the ocean; and the tumult caused by those forces pitching their tents could be heard above the roaring of the sea. That vast army of monkeys, commanded by Sugriva, ranged in three divisions, were deeply concerned with the accomplishment of Rama's mission and, from the shore where they were stationed, the monkey host gazed with delight on the vast ocean lashed by the tempest. Then those leaders of monkeys surveyed that abode of Varuna of limitless expanse, whose distant shore was inhabited by titans. Rendered formidable by the ferocity of its sharks and crocodiles, that ocean, with its foaming waves at the close of day and the approach of night, appeared to laugh and dance. When the moon rose, whose image was reflected limitlessly in its bosom, the ocean surged, swarming with gigantic sharks, whales and great fish, strong like the tempest, and it was fathomless, abounding in serpents of flaming coils and many aquatic animals and reefs. In that ocean, difficult to cross, whose ways were impassable, haunted by titans, the waves, in which sharks and sea monsters swarmed, rose and fell joyfully, whipped into motion by the breeze.
Emitting sparks and turbulent with its gleaming reptiles, the ocean, that dread refuge of the enemies of the Gods, the eternal region of hell, resembled the sky and there seemed no difference between them. The waters simulated the firmament and the firmament the waters, both manifesting the same appearance with the stars above and the pearls below with which they were filled and, one with its racing clouds and the other with its squadrons of waves, caused the sea and sky to look identical.
As wave clashed against wave without pause, the King of Rivers emitted a terrific clamour like the sound of the beating of great gongs in the sky. With its murmuring waves, its innumerable pearls and its monsters as it were pursuing it like a pack of hounds, the ocean, in the grip of a hurricane, seemed to leap excitedly.
And the magnanimous monkeys surveyed that ocean lashed by the winds and the waves which, whipped by its blast, seemed to groan. Struck with astonishment, those monkeys regarded the sea with its dashing waves, rolling on and on.