On the northern shore, the army under the command of Nila halted and the two generals, Mainda and Dvivida, foremost among the monkeys, patrolled up and down and on all sides in order to protect the monkey host.
The army being thus encamped on the shores of the Lord of the Waters, Rama, observing Lakshmana standing at his side, said to him:—
"Sorrow invariably decreases with the passing of time but in the absence of my beloved, mine increases daily! Not that my sufferings are caused by separation from my companion nor my misfortune by her abduction, what I deplore is that her youth is slipping away. O Breeze, speed to that place where my beloved is and, having caressed her, touch me, thus causing me the same delight that a weary traveller experiences when gazing on the moon! That which consumes my limbs as though I had swallowed poison, is the cry of my dear one, while being borne away, 'Help, O You who art my defender!' With my separation from her as the coals and my thoughts of her as the shimmering flames, the fire of my love consumes my body day and night!
"O Lakshmana, remain here while I plunge into the sea ere I sleep, so that the fire of my distress shall cease from tormenting me. It is enough that she and I sleep on the same earth. As dry land draws nourishment for its vegetation from marshy ground, so do I exist in the knowledge that Sita still lives! O When shall I, having overcome mine enemies, behold her of graceful limbs, whose eyes resemble lotus petals, the equal of Shri herself? When, gently raising her lotus-like face with its ravishing lips and teeth, shall I drink in her glances, as a sick man the nectar of immortality? When will that playful maiden embrace me, her round and quivering breasts like unto Tala fruits pressed against my body, like sovereignty united with prosperity?
"Alas! Though I am her support, that dark-eyed princess, who has fallen among the titans, resembles an orphan! How can it be that the daughter of Janaka, my beloved, is now in the midst of titans, she, the daughter-in-law of Dasaratha?
"When I have put those demons to flight, Sita will live anew as the autumnal moon shines forth again when the clouds are scattered. By nature slender, Sita, on account of grief, fasting and circumstance, is now a shadow of her former self.
"When, with my shafts piercing the breast of that King of Titans, shall I empty my heart of sorrow? When shall I behold the virtuous Sita, resembling a daughter of the Gods, her arms encircling my neck, shedding tears of joy? When, like a soiled garment, shall I discard the pain born of my separation from Maithili?"
As the sagacious Rama was thus lamenting, the day declined and the disc of the sun, diminishing slowly, disappeared below the horizon. Thereupon Rama, whom Lakshmana sought to console, his mind still engaged in the thought of Sita, whose eyes were as large as lotus petals, distracted by grief, performed his evening devotions.