In the face of the terrible and awe-inspiring feat executed in Lanka by Hanuman who was the equal of Indra in prowess, the King of the Titans, discomfited, with bowed head addressed his subjects, saying:—
"Lanka, hitherto inaccessible, has been laid waste by a mere monkey who has had converse with the daughter of Janaka, Sita. Overthrowing the palaces and slaying the foremost of the titans, he has turned the city upside down, such is Hanuman's achievement! What should I do now? May prosperity attend you! What plan do you consider fitting for me to adopt first? Say what you hold to be proper for us to do and which will be to our advantage I
"The wise affirm that good counsel is the root of victory, that is why, O Brave Ones, I desire to consult you concerning Rama.
"There are three kinds of men in the world, the good, the bad and the mediocre. I will describe the qualities and defects of them all to you:—
"He, who in his deliberations consults experienced counsellors, his friends with whom he shares common interests, his relatives and his superiors and then pursues his design with energy and the help of God, is considered to be the foremost of men.
"He, who enters into deliberation and pursues his duty by himself single-handedly, accomplishing that which should be accomplished, is considered a mediocre man.
"He, who fails to weigh the advantages and disadvantages of a matter and refuses God's aid, merely saying 'I shall do it', disregards his duty and is considered the least of men I
"Just as there are always those who are superior, those who are mediocre and those who are inferior among men, so there exists also good, bad and indifferent counsel.
"That judgement which is given after a clear-sighted examination of the question and to which, re-inforced by scriptural authority, the counsellors agree, is considered excellent.
"Those deliberations, where unanimity is finally reached after innumerable discussions, are considered mediocre, and those in which each person continues to stand by his own opinion and opposes those of others and where no conclusion can be reached, are considered pernicious. Therefore an undertaking that follows on wise deliberation will succeed.
"You, who are all eminently sagacious, must decide what should be done and I will subscribe to it. Rama, surrounded by thousands of heroic monkeys, is advancing on Lanka to exterminate us. Undoubtedly Raghava will cross the ocean with ease by virtue of his natural powers and be followed by his younger brother and the monkey host. He is able to dry up the sea through his valour or he may use some other means (to bridge the ocean). In view of Rama's attack on you with those monkeys, do you devise some plan to protect the city and the army!"