Then the heroic general, the Titan Prahasta, who resembled a dark cloud, joined his palms together and expressed himself thus:—
"We are able to overcome the Devas, Danavas, Gandharvas, Pisacas, Patagas and Uragas in the open field, how much more those two mortals!
"Under the influence of liquor and trusting in our own strength, we suffered ourselves to be deceived by Hanuman but as long as I live, that ranger of the woods will not enter here again alive, I shall sweep the land surrounded by the sea clean of monkeys together with its hills, forests and jungles; you have but to issue the command! I shall rid you of that monkey, O Ranger of the Night and you shalt not have to suffer on account of thine offence."
Thereafter Durmukha, in his turn, spoke in measured tones, saying:—
"Assuredly we shall not tolerate this outrage that he has committed against us all. The devastation of the city and the palaces and the insult offered to our sovereign by this monkey shall be avenged by me. Setting out alone, I shall exterminate those monkeys, whether they have taken refuge in the dreadful deep, in heaven or in hell!"
Then the powerful Vajradamshtra, in a transport of rage, began to speak, brandishing a huge mace stained with flesh and blood, and said:—
"What is that puny and miserable monkey, Hanuman, to us as long as the mighty Rama, Sugriva and Lakshmana exist? This very day, I shall return, having slain Rama, Sugriva and Lakshmana single-handed with the blows of my mace and routed that army of monkeys, or, if it pleases you, hear this further plan of mine; he, who is resourceful, may easily overcome his adversaries.
"Thousands of titans, able to change their shape at will, courageous, invincible, of terrifying aspect, are devoted to you. Let them, assuming human form, present themselves before Kakutstha, foremost of the Raghus, and, full of confidence, say to him:—
"'We are here on behalf of Bharata, your younger brother', whereupon Rama, summoning his forces will instantly come hither; then armed with lances, picks and maces, carrying bows, arrows and swords in our hands, we will set out with speed from here and meet him. Thereafter, stationed in battalions in the air, we will exterminate that army of monkeys under a hail of rocks and shafts and send them to the region of Yama. Should they fall into the trap, it will prove disastrous for them and Rama and Lakshmana will inevitably lose their lives."
Then the son of Kumbhakama, the valiant and powerful Nikumbha, in the height of anger, said in the presence of Ravana, the destroyer of the worlds:—
"Let all of you remain here with our great king; by myself I shall slay Raghava, Lakshmana, Sugriva and also Hanuman and all the monkeys."
Thereafter in his turn, a titan named Vajrabanu, as tall as a mountain, who, in his wrath, was licking his lips, took up the tale, saying:—
"Free from all anxiety, occupy yourselves with those things which afford you entertainment, single-handed I shall consume the entire monkey host. Remain here at ease and drink wine; alone I shall slay Sugriva, Lakshmana and also Hanuman, Angada and all the monkeys."