The Generals Rabhasa, the mighty Suryashatru, Saptaghna, Yajnakopa and Mahaparshva, Mahodeva, the irrespressible Agniketu and the Titan Rashiketu, the lusty Indrashatu, son of Ravana, also Prahasta, Vimpaksha and the exceedingly powerful Vajradamshtra, Dhumraksha, Nikumbha and the Titan Durmukha, brandishing maces, harpoons, lances, darts, spears, axes, bows furnished with arrows and swords shining like a great expanse of water, all of whom were blazing with anger addressed Ravana saying:—
"To-day we shall slay Rama, Sugriva and Lakshmana as also that wretch Hanuman who laid Lanka waste!"
Then Bibishana, restraining those who had seized hold of their weapons, persuaded them to be seated and spoke thus with joined palms:—
"My Dear Brother, the wise affirm that when the end which is sought cannot be attained by the three means, the conditions when force should be employed are determined by the tacticians. O Friend, deeds of valour which have been tested according to prescribed injunctions, succeed against those who are careless when attacked, or who are in opposition to the divine power. Now, Rama is on his guard, he is eager for victory, he is upheld by divine power, he has subdued his passions and is invincible, yet you seek to defeat him.
"When Hanuman crossed the ocean, that formidable Lord of Streams and Rivers, who could have conceived or even imagined the path he would take? Our adversary has immense resources and troops at his disposal O Rangers of the Night, you should in no way disregard him! What wrong has the illustrious Rama ever done to the King of the Titans that he should go to Janasthana and bear away the consort of that great One?
"If Khara, who had trespassed into a region that was not his own, was slain in combat by Rama, is it not legitimate for everyone to defend his life? It is on account of Vaidehi's abduction that we are in this great peril and we should therefore yield her up. What advantage is there in continuing the quarrel? Nay, it is not proper to enter into hostilities with that powerful and virtuous prince, who would never initiate warfare without a definite cause. Therefore do you give back Maithili to him ere he, by means of his arrows, destroys this city abounding in wealth of every kind with its horses and elephants! Before that formidable and mighty monkey host attack this, our Lanka, do you give back Sita. Lanka with all her heroic titans will perish unless the beloved consort of Rama is voluntarily returned to him.
"I adjure you by the blood that unites us to follow my counsel, which is salutory. Return Maithili to Rama ere he looses his shafts for your destruction, which are freshly sharpened, steely, infallible, plumed and bright as the autumnal sun. Give back Maithili to the son of Dasaratha without delay; renounce a resentment which destroys all felicity and virtue and pursue righteousness which increases well-being and glory. Be pacified, that we may live in tranquillity with our sons and kinsfolk. Give back Maithili to Dasaratha's son!"
Thus spoke Bibishana, and Ravana, the Lord of the Titans, dismissing them all, entered his private apartments.