Seeing the courageous Lakshmana lying on the battlefield drenched in blood, struck down by the spear discharged by the mighty Ravana, Rama entered into a terrible duel with that cruel titan whom he overwhelmed with a hail of arrows. Then he addressed Sushena and said,"The valiant Lakshmana, struck down by the ruthless Ravana, is writhing like a serpent, filling me with anguish 1 When I behold that hero, dearer to me than life itself, how, in mine affliction, can I find the strength to fight? If my brother, who is endowed with auspicious marks, that proud warrior, returns to the five elements, of what use is life or prosperity to me? My prowess is ebbing away as it were and my bow seems to be falling from my grasp; mine arrows are blunted, mine eyes blinded with tears, my limbs are heavy as when one is overcome by sleep, my thoughts wander and I long to die! In this extreme misfortune in which I am plunged, weeping, my mind distracted on seeing my brother, who is emitting inarticulate cries, lying in the dust of the battlefield, brought low by the wicked Ravana, a prey to suffering and seriously wounded in his vital parts, even victory cannot bring me felicity, O Hero. If the moon is hidden from sight what delight can it give? Of what use is it to fight? What purpose is served by living? The combat has no longer any meaning since Lakshmana is lying dead in the forefront of the battle. As that illustrious warrior followed me when I retired to the forest so will I follow him now to the abode of death.
"Ever affectionate to his kinsfolk, he was undeviatingly devoted to me; I was led to this pass by the titans who have made use of magic in the fight. Wives may be found everywhere and everywhere one may meet with friends but I see no place where one could find so dear a brother. Without Lakshmana of what use will it be for me to rule over a kingdom, O Invincible Warrior? What shall I say to Sumitra who loves her son so tenderly? I shall not be able to endure the reproaches with which she will address me. What shall I say to my mother Kaushalya or even to Kaikeyi? What answer shall I give to Bharata and the exceedingly powerful Shatrughna? Having gone with him to the forest, how can I return without him? Better were it to die than suffer the censure of my family. What sin did I commit in a former life that my virtuous brother is now lying dead before mine eyes? O My Brother, O Foremost of Men, O First of Heroes, O Prince, why, forsaking me, will you repair to the other regions? How comes it that you dost not answer me who am lamenting? Rise, look about you, why dost you remain lying there? Witness my grief with thine own eyes! In my despair, be my comforter, O Long-armed Warrior, overwhelmed as I am with anguish, wandering distracted amidst the woods and mountains."
As Rama was speaking thus, overwhelmed with affliction, Sushena, in order to comfort him, addressed these well-considered words to him,"O Tiger among Men, abandon this idea that causes you pain, this thought that pierces thine heart as a javelin in the forefront of the battle. Nay, Lakshmana, the enhancer of prosperity, has not rejoined the five elements for his features have not changed nor is he pale, rather is his countenance serene and handsome! Observe how the palms of his hands resemble the petals of a lotus and his eyes are bright. Those who appear thus have not yielded up their lives, O Lord of all Mai! Do not grieve O Hao, Conqueror of your Foes, Lakshmana lives, and the proofs are the multiple beatings of his heart united with his sighs even though his body lies stretched on the earth."
Thus spoke the extremely sagacious Sushena to Raghava and thereafter he addressed that great monkey, Hanuman, who stood near and said,"O Friend, go quickly, repair to the Mountain Mahodaya! Formerly you have heard of it from Jambavan, O Warrior! On the southern peak grow curative habs, the plants named Vishalyakarani, Savarnyakarani, Samjivakarani and also Samd-hani of great virtue. Bring them back, O Warrior, in orda to revive that hero, Lakshmana."
At these words, Hanuman repaired to the Mountain of Habs but there he became anxious, for that illustrious monkey could not recognize those remedial plants. Then the thought came to Maruti, whose strength was immeasurable, 'I will carry back the peak of the mountain for it is on the summit that the auspicious herbs are growing, at least I infer so from what Sushena has said. If I return without having picked the Vishalyakarani, the loss of time will prove fatal and a great misfortune will follow.'
Reflecting thus, the mighty Hanuman hastened on his way and when he reached that high mountain, he shook the summit three times and having broken it off, balanced it, with its multitudinous trees in full flower of varying fragrance, in his two hands. Thereafter, like a dark cloud charged with rain, that monkey sprang into the air carrying the mountain peak and returned in great haste setting it down and, having rested awhile, he said to Sushena,"I am not conversant with the medicinal plants, O Bull among Monkeys, here is the whole summit which I have brought to you I"
At these words of the son of Pavana, Sushena, the foremost of the monkeys, having uprooted the herb, took hold of it and there was great amazement among the monkeys witnessing Hanuman's feat which even the Gods themselves could only have accomplished with difficulty.
Then the foremost of monkeys, Sushena, having crushed that herb, held it to Lakshmana's nostrils and on inhaling it that prince, the scourge of his foes, who was riddled with arrows, instantly rose from the ground released from the darts and his sufferings. Meanwhile the monkeys beholding him standing erect cried out 'Excellent! Excellent!' and, full of joy, paid homage to him.
Then Rama, the slayer of his foes, said to Lakshmana,"Come, Come!" and, embracing him, pressed him dose to his heart, his eyes wet with tears. Thereafter, having embraced him, Raghava said to Saumitri,O Hero, what good fortune to see you return from the dead! Nay, assuredly neither life nor Sita nor victory had any attraction for me; in sooth what reason had I for living since you had returned to the five elements?"
Then Lakshmana, pained, answered the magnanimous Raghava who had spoken thus and, in a voice trembling with emotion, said,"Bound by your vow, O You who hast truth for your prowess, it does not become you to utter such cowardly wordsI Nay, those who speak with sincerity do not render a promise void and the proof they give is the fulfilment of their vow! You should not give way to despair on mine account, O Irreproachable Hero 1 Mayest you redeem your word by Ravana's death this day. Nay, when he comes within the range of your shafts, thine adversary must not return alive, as a great elephant may not live when he falls under the sharp tooth of a roaring lion. I desire to see that wretch perish ere the orb of the day withdraws behind the Astachala Mountain, his task accomplished. If you seeks the death of Ravana on the battlefield, if you wishest to fulfil your duty and if you dost aspire to re-capture the princess, O Illustrious Hero, do what I tell you without delay."