Distracted with fury, his eyes red with anger, urged on by destiny, Ravana addressed his charioteer, saying,"Am I then bereft of valour and strength, deprived of prowess, cowardly, infirm of purpose, weak, without energy, devoid of magic powers and debarred from combat, that you have failed me and attest on thine own understanding? How comes it that without respect for me and disregarding my commands, in the presence of the foe, you didst drive my chariot from the field! Through thine error this day, O Vile Wretch, that which I had won over a long period, glory, valour, honour and renown, are all lost to me! Before a foe famed for his prowess, who prides himself on his exploits, you have transformed me who delights in battle, into a coward. If it is not through heedlessness that you have acted thus, O Villain, my suspicions are well founded and you have been bribed by the enemy. Assuredly it was not an act of friendship or devotion; only a foe would conduct himself as you have done. If you have any loyalty to me, then return in the chariot instantly ere mine adversary has departed and remember the benefits you have received at my hands."
At these reproaches from the insensate Ravana, the sagacious charioteer made answer in words that were moderate and full of good sense, saying,"I am neither afraid, nor am I mad, nor do I yield to the solicitations of a foe, nor am I negligent, nor have I ceased to be loyal to you, nor have I forgotten the benefits I have received from your hand! It was through my desire to be of service to you and to safeguard your glory and on account of a sincere attachment, that I acted as I thought best! O Great King, you should not unjustly regard me as a vile and cowardly wretch, I who seek only to do that which is agreeable to you. Hear me, I will tell you the reason why I took your chariot, resembling a flowing current driven back by the tide, from the field.
"Observing your fatigue following on the tremendous struggle, I no longer recognized your proud assurance nor your superior strength. By drawing the chariot unceasingly, my steeds were overcome with fatigue, they were prostrate and overcome with the heat, like unto kine lashed by the rain; furthermore amidst the portents that were manifest in great numbers, not one, it seemed to me, was favourable to us.
"One should at the proper time and place observe the characteristics, gestures, facial expression, depression or exhilaration and the measure of fatigue of one's master, O Mighty Hero; also the place where the earth is firm and where it is uneven or level, where it is flat or hilly and the time for combat; when the enemy lays himself open to attack, how to advance and retire, to halt or go forward, to meet the enemy or retreat to a distance, all this must be known by a charioteer, as he stands in his chariot.
"It was on account of your prostration and the exhaustion of your steeds and in order to mitigate this terrible fatigue, that I undertook those specific measures. It was not from caprice, O Warrior, that I drove the chariot away; it was devotion to my lord that made me resolve to act in this wise. Issue any command you desirest, O Hero, O Scourge of Your Foes, and I shall fulfil it implicitly with all my heart!"
Then Ravana, fully satisfied with the reply of his charioteer, addressed many words of praise to him and, in his martial ardour, said,"Speedily drive my chariot towards Raghava, O Charioteer, Ravana is incapable of turning back ere he has destroyed his enemies in battle!"
Speaking thus, the King of the Titans standing in his chariot, bestowed a brilliant ring of great price on his charioteer and, under his orders, the driver set out to the battlefield. Urged on by Ravana's command, the charioteer whipped his steeds into a gallop and, in an instant, the great chariot belonging to that Indra among the Titans stood before Rama in the field.