Meanwhile, seeing Rama exhausted by the fight, standing absorbed in thought on the battlefield, and Ravana, facing him, preparing to begin the encounter anew, the blessed Agastya who had joined the Gods, and also come there to witness the great combat, approached that hero and said
"Rama, Rama, O Long-armed Warrior, hearken to the eternal secret which will enable you to overcome all thine adversaries. It is none other than the 'Hymn to the Sun' (Aditya-hridaya), O Dear Child, it is sacred, capable of subduing the foe and brings victory; this prayer is eternal, imperishable, exalted and auspicious, the delight of the good, the destroyer of all ills, the allayer of fear and anxiety, the increaser of life and the most excellent of all verses,"'O You, who on rising art crowned with rays, to whom the Devas and Asuras pay homage, salutations to You! You are Vivisvata, the resplendent Lord of the Worlds, the Soul of the Gods, the Effulgent One, Creator of Light, who sustainest the Hosts of Devas and Asuras and the Three Worlds with Your rays. You are the Creator, Maintainer and Destroyer, You are the God of War, the Lord of Creatures, the King of the Celestials, the Distributor of Wealth. You are Time and Death, the One possessed of splendour, the Lord of the Waters, the Ancestors, the Vasus, the Sadhyas, the Maruts, Manu, Vayu and the God of Fire. You are the Source of Life and of the seasons, You are the Great Nourisher of all, the Generator of all, the Courser in the heavens, the Maintainer, the One possessed of rays, the Golden, the Brilliant, the Cosmic Energy, the Maker of Day. You are all-pervading, myriad-rayed, the Indicator of all paths, from whom proceed the senses, You are the Thousand-beamed One, the Subduer of Darkness, the One from Whom all happiness proceeds, the Remover of the sufferings of Your votaries, the Infuser of life in the Mundane Egg, the One possessed of rays. You are the Cause of the Creation, Preservation and Destruction of the Universe, the Beneficent One, the Possessor of Wealth, the Bringer of Day, the Teacher, the Fire-wombed, (Who has the Fire of Doom in his womb) the Son of Aditi, You are supreme Felicity, the Remover of Nescience, the Lord of the Firmament, the Dispeller of Darkness, the One versed in the Rik, Yajus and Sama (Vedas), the One from Whom flows the showers, the Friend of Waters, the One Who, with a single bound, crossed the Vindhya Range. You are intent on creating the Cosmos; You are adorned with gems; You are the Bringer of Death, the Pingala (The motive power of the Pingala vein), the Destroyer of all, the Omniscent One, Whose form is the Universe, of great energy, beloved of all, Lord of all actions. O You, the Lord of stars, planets and constellations, the Creator of all, the Resplendent among the splendid, the Essence of the twelve forms (The twelve months), salutations to You 1 Salutations to the Eastern and Western Mountains, salutations to the Lord of the stellar bodies and the Lord of Day 1 Salutations to You, the bringer of victory and the joy that springs from victory, O Lord of the Golden Steeds! Salutations to You, O Thousand-rayed One, O Aditya! Salutations to You Who controls the senses, to You O Hero Who art worthy of the Holy Syllable (The Pranava 'Aum'), salutations to You Who awakeneth the Lotus 1 Salutations to You, O Fierce One, Who art the Lord of Brahma, Ishana and Achyuta! To You, O Sun, Possessor of Light, You of illumining power, the Devourer of all, Who assumest the form of Rudra, be our salutations! Salutations to You, the Destroyer of darkness, of cold and of the foe; salutations to You of Infinite Soul, the Destroyer of the ungrateful, the Lord of the Stars; salutations to You, Whose lustre resembles refined gold, the Destroyer of ignorance, the Architect of tfie universe. Salutations to You, the Remover of darkness, the Uluminer, the Beholder of all the worlds. It is You Who createst all and destroyes all, Who dryeth up, consumest and annihilates! all. You wakest when all creatures sleep, in whose heart You abidest; You are both the Sacrificial Fire and the fruit of sacrifice. You are the sum of all action and the Lord thereof.'
"O Raghava, he who recites this hymn in the time of peril, in the midst of the wilderness or in any danger does not succumb to it. Do you offer a deep devotion to that God of Gods, the Lord of the World! He who recites this hymn three times will be victorious! O Long-armed Warrior, the hour has come when you will triumph over Ravana!"
Having spoken thus, Agastya returned whence he had come. These words dispelled the grief of the illustrious Raghava who felt himself fortified, full of ardour and well pleased. Thereafter meditating on Aditya he recited the hymn and experienced supreme felicity. Having rinsed his mouth three times and purified himself, that hero took up his bow. Seeing Ravana, he rejoiced and advanced towards him in order to enter into combat, calling up his whole strength with the intention of slaying him.
At that instant the Deity of the Sun, amidst the Host of the Gods, knowing that the destruction of the Lord of the Rangers of the Night was at hand, casting glances of joy and supreme satisfaction on Rama, approached him and said,"Put forth thine whole strength!"