As the day dawned, Bibishana, renowned for his exploits, fixed in the knowledge of what was just and profitable, entered the palace of the King of the Titans which resembled a mass of crags like unto the peak of a mountain. That vast area was the resort of the great; well ordered and divided, it was inhabited by learned persons and guarded by loyal and vigilant titans on all sides. Re-echoing to the sound of the wind blended with the trumpeting of intoxicated elephants, the blare of conches and the blasts of trumpets, groups of lovely girls filled the alleys with their chattering. Its gates were of pure gold enriched by magnificent decorations resembling the abode of the Gan-dharvas or the mansions of the Maruts, and it contained heaps of gems like unto the Serpents dwellings.
Then that One of exceeding energy and renown entered the palace of his elder brother, as the sun of sparkling rays enters a cloud, and he heard the blessings invoked on his brother for his victory uttered in a loud voice by those versed in the Veda. And he beheld those priests instructed in the science of 'Mantras' and the Veda, worshipped with vessels of curds, clarified butter, flowers and hulled rice. Thereafter the mighty-armed Bibishana, duly honoured by the titans, observed the younger brother of the Bestower of Riches, who was seated there.
Approaching the throne that was covered with gold, embellished by the person of the king, he paid homage, extending fitting courtesies to him and took the seat indicated by Ravana's glance. Thereafter he addressed the mighty Dashagriva in the presence of his ministers alone and, standing before him, with soothing speech sought to pacify him, manifesting his knowledge of time and place, and expressed himself thus:—
"O Subduer of your Foes, ever since Vaidehi was brought here, inauspicious omens have been observed! The sacrificial fire emits sparks and its brightness is dimmed by smoke; impure vapours arise therefrom even after the oblations have been poured to the accompaniment of sacred formulas nor does it bum in a proper manner. In the kitchens, sacred pavilions and the halls, where the Vedas are recited, reptiles are to be found and ants are discovered in the sacrificial offerings. The milk of the kine has dried up, ichor no longer flows from the strongest of the elephants, horses find no satisfaction in their fodder and neigh incessantly, while the asses, buffalo and mules, their hair standing on end, shed tears, and, though ministered to by experts, do not behave normally, O King.
"Fierce crows gather together from all sides, emitting harsh cries and are seen swarming on the roofs of the temples. Vultures plane mournfully over the city and at dusk, jackals appear howling lugubriously. Wild beasts and deer assemble at the gates of the city, setting up an ominous noise to the accompaniment of growls. These omens indicate that your fault should be expiated as the Lord thinks proper by returning Vaidehi to Raghava.
"If, through error or expediency, I have given cause for offence, you should not condemn me, O Great Monarch! All your people, both male and female and your court affirm that the fault is thine! It is through fear that your ministers dare not counsel you but I feel compelled to inform you of what I have seen and heard. Judge what you considerest to be right and act accordingly."
Thus spoke Bibishana in measured words to his brother, Ravana, Lord of the Titans, in the presence of the ministers, and, hearing that judicious, reasonable, moderate and logical speech, productive of great good for the past, present and future, Ravana, who had conceived a passion for Sita, answered with mounting anger, saying:—
"I see no cause for fear anywhere! Rama shall never regain Maithili! Even were Lakshmana's elder brother upheld by the Gods with Indra at their head, how could he withstand me in the field?"
Having spoken thus, that destroyer of Celestial Hosts, Dashagriva, who was endowed with terrific strength and extreme prowess in combat, dismissed his brother Bibishana of frank speech.