Seeing his brother defeated, lying on the battlefield, Bibishana, his heart torn with violent grief, began to lament, saying,"O Illustrious Warrior, you who were renowned for your skill, experience and outstanding courage, even among the valiant, O You accustomed to a luxurious couch, how is it that you are lying stiff and motionless, your long arms adorned with bracelets, stretched on the ground, having suffered your diadem, the lustre of which equals the sun, to fall on the earth? O Hero that which I predicted has come to pass I Carried away by passion, in your presumption, disregarding my counsel, this fate has overtaken Prahasta, Indrajita, Kumbhakarna, Atiratha, Atikaya, Narantaka, and you thyself. Alas! The rampart of the virtuous has disappeared, the incarnation of duty has departed, the refuge of the strong and powerful is no more. The sun has fallen to earth, the moon is obscured by darkness; fire has lost its brilliance, energy is bereft of force, since that hero, the prince of warriors, lies stretched on the earth. What remains now that he is deprived of his might and that tiger among the titans lies as if asleep in the dust? That great tree, the Lord of the Titans, whose stability was the foliage, his valour the blossom, his asceticism the sap, his heroism the intertwining roots, has been overthrown on the battlefield by that tempest, Raghava. That elephant in mustha, Ravana, his strength the tusks, his lineage the backbone, his exuberance the trunk, his wrath the limbs, has been seized by the lion, Ikshvaku. That blazing fire, whose prowess and energy are spreading flames, his angry breathing the smoke, his martial ardour the heat, has been extinguished by that cloud, Rama. That bull among the titans with the Nairritas as his tail, hump and horns, his love of pleasure the eyes and ears, he the conquerer of his foes, equal to the wind in swiftness, that tiger of the lords of the earth is lying dead."
Hearing these words, full of good sense and virtue, uttered by Bibishana who was torn with grief, Rama addressed him saying,"Nay, this hero has not succumbed on account of his lack of prowess! Endowed with burning courage in battle, having displayed the greatest energy, he fell without yielding. One should not mourn for those who, firm in their duty as warriors, for the sake of renown fall on the field of battle. It is not the time to weep for this brave warrior, the terror of the worlds and their leaders, now that he lies under the sway of death; no one is always victorious in war; sometimes the brave succumb to the blows of the enemy and at other times it is the foe who is overcome by them. This path followed by Ravana was taught to us by the Sages and the warrior class hold it in great honour. The warrior who is slain in battle, should not be mourned, this is the law. In this conviction, do your duty without further anxiety and consider what action should now be taken."
Then Bibishana, who was overcome with grief, instantly replied to that noble prince who had spoken to him in his brother's interest and said,"This valiant one who, in previous battles was never defeated even by the assembled Gods under Vasava's command, assailed by you on the field, beheld his power shattered as the ocean when coming in contact with its shores. The bestower of gifts on those who desired them, he knew how to enjoy wealth and entertain those who served him. The distributor of treasure amongst his friends, he suffered his wrath to fall on his foes. Feeding the sacred fire, he practiced severe penances, was conversant with the Veda and fulfilled his duty as a real hero. Now, with thine approval, I desire to perform his obsequies."
Touched by these poignant words of Bibishana's, Rama commanded him to perform the funeral rites that lead the soul to heaven, and said,"Death has terminated our enmity that now has no reason for its existence. He is as dear to me as you; let us therefore perform the obsequies!"