Having witnessed the death of Ravana, the Devas, Gandharvas and Danavas mounted their respective chariots, discoursing on these matters. Conversing of Ravana's fearful end, the heroism of Raghava, the courageous fighting of the monkeys, the great valour of Maruti and Lakshmana and Sita's fidelity to her lord, those blessed ones returned joyfully from whence they had come.
Raghava, however, sent back the celestial chariot blazing like a flame that Indra had lent him and took leave of Matali after offering his thanks to him. Then Shakra's charioteer, dismissed by the mighty Rama, mounting his celestial car, ascended into the sky.
Matali having returned to heaven in his chariot, Raghava, the foremost of car-warriors, in the height of felicity, embraced Sugriva and, having done so, accepted Lakshmana's homage and returned to the camp amidst the acclamations of the monkey ranks.
Thereafter Kakutstha addressed the son of Sumitra, the devoted Lakshmana, the bearer of auspicious marks, who stood near him and said,"O Friend, install Bibishana as King of Lanka! On account of his loyalty, his zeal and the service he formerly rendered to us, my greatest desire is to see Bibishana, the younger brother of Ravana enthroned in Lanka, O Dear One."
At these words from the magnanimous Raghava, Saumitri, full of joy, said,"So be it!" and speedily took up a golden jar which he placed in the hands of the foremost of monkeys. Thereafter that warrior commanded water to be drawn from the four seas and the monkeys went there in all haste and, having drawn water from the oceans, returned as swiftly as thought.
Then Saumitri, at Rama's command, lifting up an excellent jar, caused Bibishana to take his place on a high seat and, following the injunctions laid down in the sacred texts, surrounded by a crowd of his friends, with that water installed him as King of Lanka amidst the titans.
All the monkeys as well as the titans assisted at Bibishana's installation and, amidst unequalled transports of delight, they paid tribute to Rama. Bibishana's counsellors were exceedingly happy, as also the titans who were devoted to him and, being enthroned as King of Lanka, he, Raghava and Lakshmana, who accompanied him, experienced supreme satisfaction. Then the new monarch, having spoken graciously to his subjects, went to where Rama was to be found.
Thereafter the people of the city offered him curds, parched rice, sweetmeats, roasted grain and flowers, which he placed at the disposal of Rama and Lakshmana, and Raghava, seeing Bibishana's work accomplished and his purpose attained, accepted all in deference to him.
Then Rama addressed the valiant Hanuman, who resembled a mountain, as he stood before him with bowed head and joined palms, saying,"With the approval of the great King Bibishana, O My Friend, do you re-enter Lanka and enquire for Maithili. Say to Vaidehi that I am well, as also Sugriva and Lakshmana. O Most Eloquent of Speakers, tell her of the death of Ravana on the field of battle. Impart these agreeable tidings to Vaidehi, O Prince of the Monkeys, and having received her commands, return!"