Thus commanded, Hanuman, born of Maruta, returned to Lanka overwhelmed with honours by the rangers of the night and, entering the city invested with Bibishana's authority which he had sought, Hanuman penetrated to the Ashoka Grove, knowing that Sita was to be found there.
There he beheld Maithili like an anguished Rohini, uncared for, sitting sorrowfully at the foot of a tree surrounded by female titans and, approaching her humbly and gently, Hanuman inclined his head in obeisance to her.
At the appearance of the mighty Hanuman, that Goddess remained silent, but thereafter, having recognized him, she was delighted, and marking her tranquil looks, Hanuman the foremost of monkeys, prepared to relate all that Rama had said,"O Vaidehi, Rama is well as also Sugriva and Lakshmana; he enquires as to your welfare! His purpose is accomplished, he, the conquerer of his foes has slain his adversary. Assisted by Bibishana and the monkeys, Rama, with the skill and wisdom of Lakshmana, has slain Ravana despite his prowess, O Goddess! These are pleasant tidings but I will delight you still further, O Divinity. In this war, undertaken on thine account, O Virtuous Sita, Rama has achieved a great triumph! Take heart therefore, have no further anxiety; Ravana is dead and Lanka subdued. Banishing sleep, I resolved to deliver you and bridging the sea fulfilled my vow. Do not fear now to be in Ravana's abode since Bibishana has become the Lord of Lanka. Because of this, take courage, you canst dwell peacefully in the palace; Rama himself is coming hither with a joyful step eager to see you."
At these tidings, the divine Sita, her face radiant as the moon on account of joy, was unable to utter a single word and that prince of monkeys enquired of Sita, who remained silent, saying,"Of what art you thinking, O Goddess, since you dost not answer me?"
Thus interrogated by Hanuman, Sita, fixed in the path of duty, in the height of joy, said in a voice broken with sobs,"Hearing these pleasant tidings of the triumph of my lord, for a moment joy rendered me speechless. Nay, assuredly, reflecting on it, O Plavamgama, I do not know what gift I can offer you which would be equal to this! I know nothing on earth comparable to these happy tidings or with what I can recompense you fittingly. Gold, precious gems of every kind, even a throne or any object in the Three Worlds cannot be measured against your message 1"
At these words of Vaidehi, the monkey, standing before her with joined palms, joyfully replied,"O You who art ever engaged in what is pleasant and advantageous to your Lord and who desirest him to be victorious, thine affectionate speech confers honour on you, O Irreproachable Lady."
Hearing this, Maithili, the daughter of Janaka addressed these flattering words to the Son of the Wind,"Your speech which is characteristic, urbane and dictated by the eight-fold intelligence is worthy of you. You, the exceedingly virtuous son of Anila art deserving of praise! Assuredly strength, prowess, knowledge of the scriptures, courage, boldness, superior skill, energy, endurance, steadiness, constancy and humility, these brilliant qualities and many others are all to be found in you!"
Unmoved by this praise, Hanuman, standing before her with joined palms, addressed Sita respectfully and said,"With your consent I will slay all those female titans who formerly taunted you in your misfortune, O You whose lord is a god. I know that those monsters of hideous shape and conduct, those cruel beings of savage looks, those grim-visaged titans, more than once addressed you in threatening tones at Ravana's command. Grant me permission to strike down those barbarians of distorted features and fearful aspect. I shall beat them with my fists, heels, long arms, thighs and knees; I shall tear them to pieces with my teeth, chew up their ears, pull out their hair, knock them down and destroy them, since they have caused you pain, O Illustrious Princess! I shall exterminate those monsters who formerly insulted you."
Hearing Hanuman's words, the unfortunate Sita, friend of the distressed, reflecting carefully, said to him,"Who would be angry with women, who are dependent on a monarch who is their supporter, and who act on other's advice as mere servants or slaves, O Excellent Monkey? All that has happened to me is on account of an evil fate and the consequence of some fault committed formerly. One reaps the fruit of one's actions. Do not speak thus, 0 Long-armed Warrior, the path of destiny is inexorable! It was inevitable that these circumstances should overtake me and, in this conviction, I wish in compassion to protect the slaves of Ravana. It was under the orders of that titan that these women ill-treated me. He being slain, they will no longer oppress me, O Son of Maruta. There is an ancient saying full of wisdom which a bear uttered formerly in the presence of a tiger, hear it, O Plavamgama!
"'A superior being does not render evil for evil, this is a maxim one should observe; the ornament of virtuous persons is their conduct. One should never harm the wicked or the good or even criminals meriting death. A noble soul will ever exercise compassion even towards those who enjoy injuring others or those of cruel deeds when they are actually committing them, who is without fault?'"
Hearing these words, Hanuman, who was skilled in speech, said to Sita, the irreproachable consort of Rama,"You are worthy of Raghava, you, his chaste wife crowned with many virtues. O Goddess, command me to seek out Rama!"
On this, Vaidehi born of Janaka, said,"I desire to see my lord, the friend of his devotees!"
Hearing her speak thus, Hanuman, the exceedingly intelligent son of Maruta made this reply to Maithili, causing that princess great delight
"This day shalt you see Rama, whose countenance resembles the full moon, with Lakshmana and his trusted friends, his enemies slain, as Saci looks upon Indra, the King of the Gods."
Having spoken thus to Sita, who was as radiant as Shri herself, the exceedingly valiant Hanuman immediately departed to rejoin Raghava. Without delay, the foremost of monkeys, Hanuman, repeated the words that the daughter of Janaka had uttered, in their proper sequence to Rama who was the equal of the Chief of the Gods.