That highly intelligent monkey, having paid obeisance to Rama, whose eyes resembled the petals of a lotus, the most skilled of archers, said to him,"It behoves you to visit Maithili who is consumed with grief and on account of whom this enterprise, that has been crowned with success, was undertaken. In the distress that overwhelms her, Maithili, her eyes bathed in tears, hearing of your victory, expressed a desire to behold you once more. Confiding in me formerly, her glances warm with emotion, she repeated 'I desire to see my lord again!'"
These words of Hanuman instantly evoked thoughts in Rama, the first of men, causing him to shed tears. Sighing deeply, he said to Bibishana standing near, who resembled a cloud,"Bring the Princess of Videha, Sita, hither, anointed with celestial unguents, adorned with heavenly jewels, having laved her head; do not delay!"
At these words of Rama, Bibishana hastened to the private apartments to fetch Sita with her attendants. Beholding the unfortunate Maithili, Bibishana, the powerful King of the Titans, paid obeisance to her, raising his joined palms to his forehead, and respectfully addressed her, saying,"O Vaidehi, sprinkle thyself with celestial unguents, adorn thyself with divine ornaments and ascend this palanquin! May happiness attend you! Your lord desires to see you!"
Then Vaidehi answered Bibishana who had addressed her thus, saying,"Without having bathed, I wish to see my consort, O Bibishana."
Hearing this, Bibishana replied,"It behoves you to do what Rama commands!" Whereto the virtuous Maithili, who regarded her husband as a god, filled with conjugal duty, said,'Be it so!'
Thereupon Sita, her tresses waved, adorned with priceless ornaments, wearing gorgeous raiment, ascended a palanquin borne by those titans accustomed to do so, accompanied by a large escort under Bibishana's command.
And Bibishana approaching that magnanimous hero, who was merged in meditation, bowing down to him, joyfully announced Sita's arrival.
Hearing that his consort, who had dwelt long in the titan's abode, had come, rage, joy and grief overwhelmed Raghava, the slayer of his foes and, beholding Sita in the palanquin, Rama, in order to test her, dissembling his happiness, said to Bibishana,"O Supreme Lord of the Titans, O My Friend who ever rejoiced in my victories, bring Vaidehi nearer to me."
At Raghava's command, the righteous Bibishana caused the crowd to disperse, whereupon titans clad in armour, wearing turbans, with drums and bamboo staves in their hands began to move about driving away the warriors, bears, monkeys and titans, who, scattering, stood apart some way off. And as they were being driven away, a tremendous clamour arose resembling the roar of the sea buffeted by the winds.
Seeing them dispersing, whilst confusion was created amongst them, Rama in affection for them, grew indignant at their departure and, highly incensed, with a glance that seemed as if it would consume him, addressed the exceedingly intelligent Bibishana in terms of reproach, saying,"Why, disregarding me, dost you harass them, are they not my people? Her conduct, not raiment, walls, seclusion or other royal prohibitions, are a woman's shield. In times of calamity, peril, war, the Svyamvara or the nuptual ceremony, it is not forbidden to behold a woman unveiled. It is not prohibited to look upon a woman who has fallen into distress and difficulty, above all in my presence. Therefore, leaving the palanquin, let Vaidehi come hither on foot so that the dwellers in the woods may see her at my side."
Hearing Rama's words, Bibishana became thoughtful and conducted Sita to him reverently, whilst Lakshmana, Sugriva and also Hanuman, hearing Rama speak thus, were saddened.
Then Maithili, confused and shrinking within herself, approached her lord accompanied by Bibishana; and it was with astonishment, delight and love that Sita, whose husband was a god, gazed on Rama's gracious appearance, she whose own face was still beautiful. Beholding the countenance of her dearly loved lord, whom she had not seen for so long and which was as radiant as the full moon when it rises, she cast aside all anxiety and her own face became as fair as the immaculate orb of the night.