Beholding Maithili standing humbly beside him, Rama gave expression to the feelings he had conceded in his heart, saying,"O Illustrious Princess, I have re-won you and mine enemy has been defeated on the battlefield; I have accomplished all that fortitude could do; my wrath is appeased; the insult and the one who offered it have both been obliterated by me. To-day my prowess has been manifested, to-day mine exertions have been crowned with success, to-day I have fulfilled my vow and am free. As ordained by destiny the stain of your separation and thine abduction by that fickle-minded titan has been expunged by me, a mortal. Of what use is great strength to the vacillating, who do not with resolution avenge the insult offered to them?
"To-day Hanuman is plucking the fruit of his glorious exploits, and Sugriva, who is valiant in war and wise in counsel, with his army is reaping the harvest of his exertions! Bibishana too is culling the fruits of his labours, he who cast off a brother, who was devoid of virtue, to come to me."
When Sita heard Rama speak in this wise, her large doe-like eyes filled with tears and, beholding the beloved of his heart standing close to him, Rama, who was apprehensive of public rumour, was torn within himself. Then, in the presence of the monkeys and the titans, he said to Sita, whose eyes were as large as lotus petals, her dark hair plaited, and who was endowed with faultless limbs,"What a man should do in order to wipe out an insult, I have done by slaying Ravana for I guard mine honour jealously! You were re-won as the southern region, inaccessible to man, was re-gained by the pure-souled Agastya through his austerities. Be happy and let it be known that this arduous campaign, so gloriously terminated through the support of my friends, was not undertaken wholly for your sake. I was careful to wipe out the affront paid to me completely and to avenge the insult offered to mine illustrious House.
"A suspicion has arisen, however, with regard to your conduct, and your presence is as painful to me as a lamp to one whose eye is diseased! Henceforth go where it best pleases you, I give you leave, O Daughter of Janaka. 0 Lovely One, the ten regions are at your disposal; I can have nothing more to do with you! What man of honour would give rein to his passion so far as to permit himself to take back a woman who has dwelt in the house of another? You have been taken into Ravana's lap and he has cast lustful glances on you; how can I reclaim you, I who boast of belonging to an illustrious House? The end which I sought in re-conquering you has been gained; I no longer have any attachment for you; go where you desirest! This is the outcome of my reflections, O Lovely One! Turn to Lakshmana or Bharata, Shatrughna, Sugriva or the Titan Bibishana, make your choice, O Sita, as pleases you best. Assuredly Ravana, beholding your ravishing and celestial beauty, will not have respected your person during the time that you didst dwell in his abode."
On this, that noble lady, worthy of being addressed in sweet words, hearing that harsh speech from her beloved lord, who for long had surrounded her with every homage, wept bitterly, and she resembled a creeper that has been tom away by the trunk of a great elephant.