That unrighteous monarch, a slave to his passion, disregarding his real friends, in consequence of his evil act began to suffer decrease.
His lustful desire exceeding all bounds, his thoughts constantly occupied with Vaidehi, though the occasion for war was lacking, with his ministers conceived that the time for entering into hostilities had come. Thereupon, sallying forth, he ascended his mighty chariot plated with gold, encrusted with coral and pearl and harnessed to well-trained horses. Seated in that excellent car, which reverberated like thunder, Dashagriva, the foremost of titans drove to the place of assembly.
Titans with swords, bucklers and every kind of weapon preceded their king on the highway, some garbed in strange attire covered with every kind of gem marched at his side or followed in his wake, and they surrounded him on all sides. The foremost of the car-warriors speedily precipitated themselves in his vanguard with their chariots or on great elephants intoxicated with Mada juice or horses which they caused to rear. Brandishing maces and crowbars, they held picks and darts in their hands.
As Ravana approached the assembly, the sound of innumerable musical instruments could be heard and the blare of trumpets broke forth to the accompaniment of the rolling of vehicles whilst the great chariot of that Indra of Demons passed along the splendidly decorated highway. The canopy, that was held over his head, shone with an immaculate purity, resembling the king of the stars at his full, and two fans of Yaks tails with crystal handles and golden fringes were waved to and fro from left to right. All the titans having alighted, stood with joined palms and bowed heads in homage to their king who was seated in his car.
Amidst acclamations and cries of triumph from those titans, that scourger of his foes made his solemn entry into the assembly hall that had been constructed by Vishvakarma.
The floor was of refined gold and six hundred evil spirits guarded it. Into that excellent audience hall, a masterpiece of Vishvakarma, Ravana made his entry sparkling with magnificence and seated himself on a gorgeous throne wrought of emeralds, carpeted with skins of deer and furnished with thick cushions.
Thereupon he issued his orders imperiously to exceedingly fleet messengers, saying,"Summon the titans hither with all speed!" thereafter adding, "A great blow is about to be struck by the enemy!"
Hearing this command, his envoys dispersed to search throughout Lanka, entering every house and scouring the highways and pleasure resorts, assembling the titans without ceremony. Some started out in excellent chariots, some on swift and mettlesome horses or elephants and some on foot. The city was thronged with cars, elephants and horses and resembled the sky filled with birds.
Then they abandoned their mounts and chariots of every kind in order to enter the audience chamber and they resembled lions penetrating into a rocky cavern.
Having, each in turn, paid homage to the feet of the king, they took up their positions, some on seats, some on cushions, some on the ground, and gathering in that hall at his command they grouped themselves according to rank round their sovereign, the Lord of the Titans.
They came in hundreds; ministers distinguished for their skill in dealing with affairs and talented sagacious counsellors able to view all with the eye of understanding; warriors also in great numbers gathered in the hall that sparkled with gold, in order to prepare for the success of their campaign.
At that moment, arriving in a magnificent chariot, its various parts encrusted with gold, Bibishana appeared in the assembly presided over by his elder brother and, announcing himself by name, he paid obeisance to the feet of the king, whereafter Shuka and Prahasta, in their turn, did homage to that monarch, who conferred special places upon them befitting their rank.
The titans were adorned with fine gold and every kind of ornament, arrayed in rich vestures, and the fragrance of aloes and rare sandalwood from their garlands perfumed the hall on every side.
Neither harsh accents nor ill-advised utterances nor loud whisperings could be heard in the assembly and, their desires crowned, all those titans of extreme prowess fixed their eyes on the face of their sovereign.
In the midst of those skilled warriors full of energy, the intelligent Ravana appeared resplendent in that assembly like unto the God with the Thunderbolt amongst the Vasus.