Meanwhile the righteous Rama, hearing the lamentation of the masses, afflicted, pondered awhile and his eyes filled with tears.
Then the King Vaishravana and Yama with the Pitris, the Thousand-eyed Lord of the Celestials, Varuna, Lord of the Waters and Mahadeva the blessed Three-eyed God who rides the Bull, as also Brahma the Creator of the World, King of the Learned, all gathered together, having hastened there in their chariots as bright as the sun, coming to the City of Lanka to seek out Rama.
Lifting up their great arms and hands adorned with jewels, they made obeisance with joined palms and the King of the Gods addressing Raghava, said,"O Creator of the Universe and foremost of those versed in the spiritual science, how canst you manifest indifference to Sita falling into the flames? How art you unaware that you thyself art the Chief of the Gods? Formerly you were the Vasu Ritadhaman, the Progenitor of the Vasus 1 You are the Creator of the Three Worlds, Svyamprabhu, the eighth Rudra and the fifth of the Sadhyas. The Twin Ashvins are your two ears, the sun and moon thine eyes; these are the forms at the beginning, middle and end of creation in which you dost appear, O Scourge of Your Foes; and yet you dost distrust Vaidehi as if you were an ordinary man 1"
Thus addressed by the Protector of the Worlds, the Leader of the Gods, Raghava, Lord of Peoples, Foremost of the Pious, answered,"I deem myself to be a man, Rama, born of Dasaratha; who then am I in reality? From whence have I come? Let the Grandsire of the World inform me 1"
Thus spoke Kakutstha and Brahma, foremost of those who know the truth, addressed him saying,"You are the great and effulgent God Narayana, the fortunate Lord armed with the discus. You are the One-Tusked Boar, the Conqueror of your Foes in the past and the future. You are the imperishable Brahman, Existence Itself, transcending the three divisions of time; You are the Law of Righteousness, the Four-armed, the Bearer of the Sharnga Bow; You are the Subduer of the senses, the Supreme Purusha; You are invincible, You are the Holder of the Dagger, You are Vishnu, You are Krishna and of immeasurable might; You are Senani and Gramani, the Controller of passions, the Origin and Dissolution; You are Upendra and die Slayer of the Demon Madhu, You are the Creator of Indra and Indra Himself; You are the Lotus-navelled One; You dost bring combat to an end. The great and divine Rishis acknowledge You as their refuge and protector. You are the Himalayas of a hundred peaks, the Essence of the Vedas, the God of a Hundred Tongues, the Great Bull, You thyself art the Creator of the World, Svyamprabhu; You are the Refuge and Elder of the Siddhas and Sadhyas; You are the Sacrifice, the sacred syllable 'Vashat' and 'Aum', the greatest of the great. None knows thine origin or end or who You really art. You are manifest in all beings, in the cows and the brahmins; You pervadest all regions, the firmament, the mountains and the rivers, You, the Thousand-footed God, the Thousand-headed One, You of a Thousand Eyes! You are the support of all beings and the earth. When the earth is withdrawn, under the form of a great serpent, You dost appear on the waters supporting all the worlds and the Gods, Gandharvas and Danavas, O Rama. I am your heart and the Goddess Sarasvati, your tongue; the Gods are the hairs of Your body, I, Brahma created them thus. When You dost close thine eyes, it is night and when You dost open them, it is day. The Vedas are Your Samskaras (i.e., Latent Impressions); nothing exists apart from you; the whole universe is Your body, the earth Your forbearance; Agni Your wrath, Soma Your beneficence, the Shrivatsa Mark, Your holy symbol.
"You didst cover the Three Worlds in three strides; You didst bind the terrible Bali and establish Mahendra as King. Sita is Lakshmi and You, the God Vishnu, Krishna and Prajapati. It was in order to slay Ravana that You didst enter a human body. This task that we entrusted to You has been accomplished, O You, the foremost of those who observe their duty. Ravana having fallen, do You ascend to heaven joyfully I Your might is irresistible, O Rama, and thine exploits are never fruitless. To behold You and offer adoration to You is never unprofitable! It is not in vain that men are devoted to You on earth. Those who are ever faithful to You, attain to You who art the primeval Purusha and their desires will be fulfilled in this world and the other worlds. Those who recite this eternal, ancient and traditional theme, transmitted by the Rishis, will never suffer defeat."