Hearing those excellent words uttered by the Grandsire, Vibhabasu, who bore Vaidehi in his lap, having extinguished the pyre, rose up, and that Bearer of Sacrificial Offerings, assuming a corporeal form, stood up and took hold of the daughter of Janaka. Then that youthful woman, beautiful as the dawn, wearing ornaments of refined gold, attired in a red robe, having dark and curly hair, wearing fresh garlands, the irreproachable Vaidehi was restored to Rama by the God of Fire.
Thereafter the Witness of the whole world, Pavaka, addressed Rama, saying,"Here is Vaidehi, O Rama, there is no sin in her! Neither by word, feeling or glance has your lovely consort shown herself to be unworthy of your noble qualities. Separated from you, that unfortunate one was borne away against her will in the lonely forest by Ravana, who had grown proud on account of his power. Though imprisoned and closely guarded by titan women in the inner apartments, you wast ever the focus of her thoughts and her supreme hope. Surrounded by hideous and sinister women, though tempted and threatened, Maithili never gave place in her heart to a single thought for that titan and was solely absorbed in you. She is pure and without taint, do you receive Maithili; it is my command that she should not suffer reproach in any way."
These words filled Rama's heart with delight and he, the most eloquent of men, that loyal soul, reflected an instant within himself, his glance full of joy. Then the illustrious, steadfast and exceedingly valiant Rama, the first of virtuous men, hearing those words addressed to him, said to the Chief of the Gods,"On account of the people, it was imperative that Sita should pass through this trial by fire; this lovely woman had dwelt in Ravana's inner apartments for a long time. Had I not put the innocence of Janaki to the test, the people would have said,'Rama, the son of Dasaratha is governed by lust!' It was well-known to me that Sita had never given her heart to another and that the daughter of Janaka, Maithili, was ever devoted to me. Ravana was no more able to influence that large-eyed lady, whose chastity was her own protection, than the ocean may pass beyond its bournes. Despite his great perversity, he was unable to approach Maithili even in thought, who was inaccessible to him as a flame. That virtuous woman could never belong to any other than myself for she is to me what the light is to the sun. Her purity is manifest in the Three Worlds; I could no more renounce Maithili, born of Janaka than a hero his honour. It behoves me to follow your wise and friendly counsel, O Gracious Lords of the World."
Having spoken thus, the victorious and extremely powerful Rama, full of glory, adored for his noble exploits, was re-united with his beloved and experienced the felicity he had merited.