Hearing those excellent words uttered by Raghava, Maheshvara addressed him with even greater eloquence, saying,"O Lotus-eyed One, O You the possessor of long arms and a broad chest, O Scourge of Your foes, fortunate it is that you have accomplished this great feat, O Most Pious of Men 1
"O Rama, it is well for all beings that you have dispelled this deep and dreadful darkness of the whole world, this fear created by Ravana. Go now and console the unfortunate Bharata with your presence, the illustrious Kaushalya, Kaikeyi and Sumitra, the mother of Lakshmana. Rule over Ayodhya, giving satisfaction to thine innumerable friends and establish the dynasty of the Ikshvaku Race. O Mighty Hero, having performed the Ashvamedha Sacrifice and acquired supreme renown, having distributed wealth among the brahmins, do you attain the highest state.
"Behold King Dasaratha standing in his chariot, your sire, your superior in the world of men, O Kakutstha! Having crossed the sea of relativity by your grace, full of glory he has entered the region of Indra; with your brother Lakshmana pay homage to him!"
Hearing the words of Mahadeva, Raghava who was accompanied by Lakshmana, bowed before his sire, who was standing in his aerial car on high, and that prince with his brother Lakshmana beheld his sire blazing in his own effulgence, clad in spotless raiment. With extreme delight, King Dasaratha, standing in his chariot, once again beheld his son who was as dear to him as his own life and that long-armed warrior, on his seat, took him in his lap and embracing him, said,"Far from you I do not prize the heaven in which I dwell with the Gods, O Rama, this is the truth! O Most Eloquent of Men, the words addressed to me by Kaikeyi, which were designed to effect your banishment, have never been erased from mine heart! Embracing you and Lakshmana and beholding you well and happy, I am delivered from mine affliction as the sun when the mist has been dispelled. By your grace, 0 My Son, you who art truly filial and of noble soul, I am redeemed, as was the virtuous Brahmin Kahola by Ashtavakra. Now it is made clear to me, O Dear Child, that in order to destroy Ravana, the Gods determined that the supreme Purusha should become incarnate as man.
"Assuredly Kaushalya will see all her desires fulfilled, O Rama, when she beholds you returning from the forest, O Slayer of Your Foes. O Rama, the people, seeing you returning to the city and installed as king and ruler of the world, will indeed be blessed! I desire to see you re-united with Bharata, your devoted, valiant, pure and loyal brother. You have passed fourteen years in the forest with my beloved Sita and Lakshmana, O Dear Child. The term of thine exile is over, your vows honoured, and further, by slaying Ravana on the battlefield, you have gratified the Gods. Your task is accomplished; you have won infinite renown, O Slayer of Your Foes; now, installed as king, mayest you with your brothers live for a long time!"
With joined palms, paying obeisance to King Dasaratha, who had thus addressed him, Rama answered,"O Virtuous Sire, give your blessings to Kaikeyi and Bharata! You didst pronounce a terrible curse upon them, saying,'I renounce you and your son! may this malediction not fall on Kaikeyi or her son, O Lord." 'Be it so!' replied that great monarch, paying obeisance with joined palms to Rama who had spoken thus, and thereafter embracing Lakshmana, he said to him,"You have acquired extreme merit, O Pious One, and your fame will be great on earth; by Rama's grace you shalt attain heaven and your power shall be inconceivable. Attend on Rama and be happy, O You who art the increaser of Sumitra's delight. Rama is ever engaged in the welfare of all beings. The Three Worlds with their Indras, the Siddhas and the great Rishis do honour to that great hero and adore him as the supreme Purusha. He, your brother, is the invincible, imperishable Brahman, the essence of the Veda, which is secret, and the Inner Ruler of all, O Dear Child! You have acquired great merit and glory in serving him and the Princess of Videha with devotion"
Having spoken thus to Lakshmana, the King paid obeisance to Sita who stood before him with joined palms, and addressed her in gentle tones, saying,"My Daughter, do not take it ill that Rama renounced you! O Vaidehi, he acted thus in thine own interest in order to demonstrate thine innocence! The proof of your chaste conduct, which you have given to-day, places you above all other women. O My Daughter, you have no need to be instructed regarding your duty towards your husband, nevertheless I must tell you that he is the Supreme God."
Having thus addressed his two sons and Sita, King Dasaratha, the descendant of Raghu, ascended to the region of Indra in his chariot. Mounted on his aerial car, full of majesty, his body blazing with effulgence, that foremost of men, having given his counsel to his two sons and Sita, returned to the abode of the Sovereign of the Gods.