King Dasaratha having departed, Mahendra, the Vanquisher of Paka, addressed Raghava, who stood before him with joined palms, and said,"O Rama, O Lion among Men, our presence here must not prove unfruitful; we are pleased with you; ask what you desirest!"
Hearing these magnanimous words of the blessed Mahendra, Raghava, of compassionate soul, answered him joyfully,"Since you wishest to gratify me, O Chief of the Vibudhas, grant me that which I ask of you! O Most Eloquent of Orators, let all the valiant monkeys, who for my sake descended into the region of death, be resuscitated and live again. I wish to see all those monkeys happy, who for my sake left their sons and wives, O Great Lord.
"Those courageous monkeys, those heroes who courted death and, crowning their sacrifice, succumbed, do you restore to life, O Purandara 1 Devoted to mine interests they disregarded death; be gracious enough to give them back to their families; I solicit this favour of you 1 I wish to see the Golangulas and the Bears in all their former energy, freed from their sufferings and their wounds, O Munificent God. Let there be flowers, roots and fruits, even though they be out of season, and rivers with pure water in abundance wherever the monkeys are to be found."
Hearing these words of the magnanimous Raghava, Mahendra answered graciously,"Hard indeed to fulfil is this boon, you dost crave, O Dear Prince of the Raghus, but my words never prove vain; so be it! May all those who have been slain in battle by the titans, the Bears and the Gopucchas, whose heads and arms have been severed, be resurrected! May those monkeys rise up exalting, without pain or wounds, in all their natural vigour and courage, like sleepers who wake at the end of night, and let them be reunited with their friends, relatives and tribes! O You, the Wielder of the Great Bow, may the trees be laden with fruit and flowers even out of season and the rivers be full of pure water."
Thereupon those excellent monkeys, who were formerly covered with wounds, rose up healed, as persons who have been asleep, and there was general astonishment amongst the monkeys, who questioned each other, saying, 'What is this?'
Seeing his purpose fulfilled, the Gods, in an excess of joy, unanimously addressed Rama, who was accompanied by Lakshmana, praising him and saying,"Now return to Ayodhya, O King and disband the monkeys; do you console the devoted and illustrious Maithili! Seek out your brother Bharata who, in sorrow of your separation, has given himself up to penances. Approach the magnanimous Shatrughna and all your mothers, O Scourge of Your Foes! Be installed as king and rejoice the hearts of the citizens by your return!"
Having spoken thus to Rama who was accompanied by Saumitri, the Gods, paying obeisance to him, joyfully returned to heaven in their chariots blazing like the sun; and Rama with his brother ordered the encampment of the army.
Thereafter, under Rama and Lakshmana's protection, that great and glorious company of happy people, radiant with splendour, resembled the night illumined on all sides by that orb of cool rays.