Having passed the night, Rama the conqueror of his foes, rose happily and Bibishana, paying obeisance to him with joined palms, addressed him, saying,"Here are various articles for bathing such as unguents, ornaments, sandalwood paste, raiment and celestial garlands of every kind. Lotus-eyed women, versed in the art of applying perfume await your pleasure, as is fitting, O Raghava!"
At these words, Kakutstha answered Bibishana saying,"Do you invite the foremost of the monkeys and Sugriva to bathe first, for the pious Bharata, accustomed to happiness, that youthful and loyal hero is suffering on mine account. Far from Bharata, Kaikeyi's son, who has been loyal to his duty, I do not value bathing or raiment or jewels! Order it so that we may return to Ayodhya soon, assuredly the route is extremely arduous."
Thus did Rama speak and Bibishana answered,"I will arrange for you to reach that city in one day, O Prince! May happiness attend you! There is an aerial car named Pushpaka that shines like the sun, which the powerful Ravana forcibly took from Kuvera, having overcome him in combat. That celestial and marvellous chariot, going everywhere at will, is at your disposal, O You of unequalled prowess! That car, bright as a cloud, which will transport you to Ayodhya in perfect safety, is here. But if I am worthy of a boon, if you dost recall any merit in me, then remain here for at least one day, O Virtuous One. If you have any friendship for me, then remain here with your brother Lakshmana and Vaidehi, your consort. Having received all possible homage, O Rama, you shalt depart. I have prepared those honours dictated by mine affection, O Rama, do you enjoy them with thine innumerable friends and thine army also. I beg you in all humility, out of my profound esteem and feeling of friendship for you, O Raghava; I am your servant and therefore may not command you."
Then Rama answered Bibishana, who had spoken thus in the presence of all the titans and monkeys and said,"O Hero, You have honoured me with your friendship with thine whole soul and in all thine actions hast proved your supreme affection for me. Nevertheless I cannot accept your request, O King of the Titans, because my heart urges me to see my brother Bharata again, he who came to Cittrakuta in order to bring me back to Ayodhya though, as he bowed before me, I did not listen to his appeal. I wish to see Kaushalya, Sumitra and the illustrious Kaikeyi, as also mine house, my friends, the people of the city and the country. Grant me leave, O Dear Bibishana, You have paid me sufficient honour! Do not be angry, O My Friend, I beg of you. O Foremost of the Titans, prepare the aerial car speedily, my task has been accomplished, what justification is there for remaining here longer?"
Hearing Rama's words, that Indra among the Titans, Bibishana, hastened to order the aerial Chariot Pushpaka, gilded and bright as the sun, with its seats of emerald and pearl, its rooms ranged round about, silvered all over, its white banners and supports and gilded apartments enriched with golden lotuses which were hung with many bells. Round the windows, set with pearls and rare gems, rows of bells were placed giving forth a melodious sound, and that moving palace, resembling the peak of Mount Meru, constructed by Vishvakarma, abounded in rich ornaments, gold and jewels and sparkled with silver, and its floors were inlaid with crystal and the thrones of emerald (displayed there) furnished with rare coverings.
Having prepared that indestructible vehicle, the Chariot Pushpaka, which was as swift as thought, Bibishana stood before Rama, and that aerial car, that went everywhere at one's will and resembled a mountain, having been placed at his disposal, the magnanimous Rama who was accompanied by Saumitri, was astonished.