The Chariot Pushpaka, having been prepared and adorned with flowers, Bibishana, who stood a little way off with joined palms, reverently enquired of Rama with some urgency, saying,"What shall I do now, O Raghava?"
Then the supremely illustrious Raghava, having reflected awhile, in the presence of Lakshmana, made answer affectionately, saying,"All the inhabitants of the woods have brought about the fulfilment of my mission by their efforts; O Bibishana, do you gratify them abundantly with jewels and riches of every kind. With their support you have recaptured Lanka, O Sovereign of the Titans! Full of ardour, they did not fear to expose their lives nor did they ever retreat in combat. They have fulfilled their task; now reward them by distributing gold and gems among them. When, in your gratitude, you have loaded them with gifts, the monkeys will be fully satisfied.
"You dost know how to give and how to receive, you are liberal and master of your senses, all know you to be a renunciate, it is for this that I address you and exhort you, O Prince; a king will wage war in vain and his army abandon him at the first opportunity if he be wholly devoid of those qualities that render him pleasing to all."
Hearing Rama's words, Bibishana bestowed precious gems and riches of every kind in abundance on all the monkeys and, beholding the foremost of the monkeys loaded with jewels and silver, Rama ascended the chariot of his adversary, holding the chaste and illustrious Vaidehi to his breast and accompanied by his brother Lakshmana, that valiant bow-man.
Standing in the chariot, Kakutstha bade farewell to all the monkeys, to the mighty Sugriva and to Bibishana and said,"O Foremost of Monkeys, you have accomplished all that could be asked of a friend, now go where you will, I give you all leave to depart. O Sugriva, you who fearest nought but unrighteousness, you have done all that a devoted and loyal companion could do; return to Kishkinda at the head of thine army. And you, Bibishana, occupy the throne of Lanka that I have conferred upon you. Even the inhabitants of heaven and their chiefs will not be able to trouble you. I go to Ayodhya, that was the royal residence of my sire and wish to take leave of you all and to offer you my salutations 1"
Thus did Rama speak and all the leaders of the monkeys and the monkeys themselves as also the Titan Bibishana, paying obeisance with joined palms, answered,"We desire to go to Ayodhya, take us all with you 1 We shall delight in ranging the woods and copses and assisting at thine installation, of which you are worthy. Having paid obeisance to the Queen Kaushalya, we shall return to our homes without delay, O Greatest of Kings".
Thus did they speak and the virtuous Rama answered the monkeys, Sugriva and Bibishana, saying,"Nothing would be more agreeable to me, as also to mine innumerable friends, than to return to the capital with you all. Hasten to take your place with your monkeys in the chariot, O Sugriva, and you too, O Bibishana with your ministers, O King of the Titans."
Thereupon Sugriva with the monkeys and Bibishana with his counsellors, took their places in the celestial Pushpaka Chariot and, all being installed, that marvellous aerial car belonging to Kuvera rose into the air under Raghava's command. In the chariot, which shone brightly, and was harnessed to swans, Rama exulted, overcome with delight, and resembled Kuvera himself, whilst all the monkeys, bears and titans, full of vigour, seated comfortably in that celestial car travelled at ease.