Having completed the fourteen years of exile, on the fifth day of the lunar fortnight, the elder brother of Lakshmana reached the hermitage of Bharadvaja and bowed low before that Ascetic. Paying obeisance to him, he enquired of the Sage, saying
"O Blessed One, dost you know if all are well and happy in the city? Is Bharata fixed in his duty? Do my mothers still live?"
Thus did Rama question Bharadvaja and that great Sage, smiling, answered the Prince of the Raghus cheerfully and said,"Bharata, his locks matted, carrying out thine instructions, awaits your return. In the presence of your sandals, to which he pays homage, he rules all in the best interests of your family and country.
"Beholding you clad in bark, setting out on foot, your consort making the third, banished from your kingdom, entirely devoted to your duty, obedient to the behests of your sire, renouncing every pleasure, like unto a God driven from heaven, formerly I was filled with pity for you; then, O Victorious Warrior, you, dispossessed by Kaikeyi, nourished thyself on fruits and roots; but now I see you, your purpose accomplished surrounded by friends and kinsfolk, having triumphed over thine enemy and my joy is supreme!
"I know all that you have experienced of good and ill whilst dwelling in Janasthana, O Raghava, and how, engaged in procuring the welfare of the Sages, seeking to protect them all, thine irreproachable consort was borne away by Ravana. I know of the appearance of Marica and Sita's delusion; the meeting with Kabandha; thine arrival at Lake Pampa, the alliance with Sugriva when Bali fell under your blows; the search for Vaidehi and the exploit of the Wind-god's son; the construction of the causeway by Nala and the finding of Vaidehi; how Lanka was set on fire by the foremost of the monkeys whilst he was bound; how Ravana, proud of his strength, fell in the fight with his sons, kinsfolk, ministers, infantry and cavalry; how after the death of Ravana, who was a thorn in the side of the Gods, you didst meet the Celestials and receive a boon from them; all these things I know by virtue of my penances, O Hero, O You who art fixed in virtue.
"Therefore I have sent my disciples to carry the news to the city and I too will grant you a boon, O Most Skilful of Warriors; but first accept the Arghya, to-morrow you shalt go to Ayodhya,"
Hearing these words, the illustrious prince, with bowed head, answered joyfully, 'It is well!' and made the following request
"On the road I take to reach Ayodhya, though it is not the season, yet may all the trees bear honeyed fruits and those fruits have the fragrance of 'Amrita" and may every variety be found there; O Blessed One!"
Thereupon the Sage replied: "So be it! Your desire shall be realised immediately!" Then the trees of that region instantly resembled those of Paradise. Those that had none, grew fruits, and those that had no flowers were covered with blossom; trees that had withered were enveloped with foliage and all dripped with honey for three leagues along the way.
Meanwhile the foremost of the monkeys regaled themselves on those celestial fruits to the extent of their desire and, transported with joy, imagined they had entered heaven.