When he beheld Ayodhya, that descendant of Raghu of rapid step full of magnanimity, gave himself up to pleasant thoughts and, having reflected awhile, that fortunate and illustrious hero said to the monkey, Hanuman,"Hasten with all speed to Ayodhya, O Foremost of Monkeys, and ascertain if all are happy in the royal palace. Passing Shringavera, communicate with Guha, King of the Nishadas, who dwells in a wooded country, and offer him my salutations. When he hears that I am safe and well, freed from all anxieties, he will be content, for he is my second self and my friend. He will gladly show you the way to Ayodhya and give you tidings of Bharata. Do you enquire of Bharata as to his well-being and inform him that I have returned with my consort and Lakshmana, my mission accomplished. Tell him of Sita's abduction by the ruthless Ravana, of my meeting with Sugriva and the death of Bali in combat; of how I set out to find Maithili and how you didst discover her, having crossed the great waters of that domain of the unchangeable Lord of Rivers! Tell him of our arrival on the shores of the sea, the appearance of Sagara and how the causeway was constructed; how Ravana perished; of the boons bestowed on me by Mahendra, Brahma and Varuna and, by the favour of Mahadeva, the meeting with my Sire. Inform Bharata, O My Friend, that I am coming accompanied by King Bibishana and the Lord of the Monkeys. Say to him, 'Having overcome the army of the enemy and attained a glory without parallel, Rama, his purpose accomplished, is approaching with his valiant friends Do you carefully observe the expression on the face of Bharata when he hears these tidings and how he comports himself. You will know all by his gestures, the colour of his face, his glances and his words. Whose mind would not be moved by the thought of (ascending) an ancestral throne, fulfilling all one's dreams, and to a kingdom abounding in prosperity, hosts of elephants, horses and chariots? If the fortunate Bharata wishes to reign in his own right, then, by mutual agreement, let that descendant of Raghu govern the entire earth!"
On receiving these instructions, Hanuman, born of Maruta, assuming human form, left in all haste for Ayodhya and advanced with speed, like unto Garuda swooping on a great serpent on which he wishes to lay hold. Traversing the path-way of his sire, the shining abode of great birds and, crossing over the formidable confluence of the Ganges and the Yamuna, he reached the City of Shringavera. Then the valiant Hanuman sought out Guha and said to him, his voice ringing with joy,"Your friend, Kakutstha, that true hero who is accompanied by Sita as also Saumitri, enquires as to your welfare. Having spent the fifth night of the moon with the Sage Bharadvaja, on his request, Raghava has now taken leave of him and you will see him to-morrow."
Having said this, the illustrious and agile Hanuman, whose hair stood on end with delight, rushed on regardless of fatigue. Thereafter he crossed the river sacred to Parasurama, and the Valukini, Varuthi and Gaumati and the formidable forest of Sala Trees, also many densely populated countries and opulent cities. Having journeyed a great distance that foremost of monkeys came to the flowering trees that grow in the neighbourhood of Nandigrama and resemble those of Caitaratha, the gardens of the King of the Celestials. There he beheld people who, with their wives, sons and grandsons, well-attired were given up to enjoyment in those pleasant surroundings.
Thereafter, at a distance of one league from Ayodhya, he observed Bharata, dad in a black antelope skin, sad, emaciated, wearing matted locks, his limbs besmeared with dust, dwelling in a hermitage, afflicted on account of his brother's misfortune. Living on fruit and roots, practising penance, self-controlled, his hair knotted, dressed in bark and a black antelope skin, disdplined, pure of soul, like unto a Brahmarishi in radiance, he, having placed Rama's sandals before him, ruled the earth by protecting the four castes from every peril with the aid of his ministers, and virtuous priests and senior officers wearing red robes surrounded him. And his subjects, faithful to their duty, had resolved not to neglect the welfare of their king, who resembling, righteousness itself, seemed to be the God of Dharma incarnate.
Then Hanuman, paying obeisance with joined palms, said to that loyal prince,"Your brother, Kakutstha, for whose exile to the Forest of Dandaka in robes of bark and matted locks, you grievest, enquires as to your welfare. I bring you good tidings, O Prince, abandon your despair; the moment has come when you will be re-united with your brother Rama. Having slain Ravana and recovered Maithili, Raghava is returning with his valiant friends, his purpose accomplished. The mighty Lakshmana too is coming and the illustrious Vaidehi, Rama's devoted companion, as Saci is to Mahendra."
Hearing Hanuman's words, Bharata, the son of Kaikeyi swooned with joy, felicity causing him to lose consciousness. In a moment, however, the descendant of Raghu, Bharata, rose up breathing with an effort and addressed Hanuman who had brought him those pleasant tidings. Deeply moved, the fortunate Bharata, embracing the monkey bedewed him with his tears that fell from him in great drops, inspired not by suffering but by joy, and said,"Whether you be god or man who has come hither out of compassion for me, O My Friend, I wish to bestow a gift on you for the happy tidings you have brought me. I offer you a hundred thousand cows, as also a hundred prosperous villages and sixteen youthful women for your consorts, possessed of curls, with sweet expressions, golden skins, shapely noses, lovely ankles and gracious mien, resembling the moon, adorned with every kind of ornament, all of noble families."
Hearing from that Prince of Monkeys of the miraculous return of Rama, Bharata, whose desire to behold his brother again threw him into a transport of delight, added joyfully,