"Verily it is with joy that I learn these tidings of my protector after the innumerable years that he has passed in the forest. How felicitous is the well-known saying, 'Happiness comes to man even if it be after a hundred years!' How did Raghava and the monkeys conclude an alliance and for what purpose? Answer my questions candidly!"
Thus interrogated by the prince, Hanuman, seating himself on a heap of Kusha Grass, began to describe Rama's life in the forest and said,"O Lord, you knowest how he was exiled on account of the two boons bestowed on your mother; how the King Dasaratha died in consequence of his son's banishment; how the messengers, O Lord, brought you back from Rajagriha; how, returning to Ayodhya, you didst refuse the crown; how you didst go to Cittrakuta to appeal to your brother, the scourge of his foes, begging him to accept the throne, thus conforming to the way of virtuous men; how Rama renounced the kingdom and how, on returning, you didst bring back the sandals of that illustrious hero; all this, O Long-armed Warrior is well-known to you but what happened subsequent to your departure, now hear from me!
"After your return, distress seized the denizens of the forest, creating a great turmoil. Thereupon Rama, Sita and Lakshmana entered the huge, dreadful and lonely Dandaka Forest that was trodden down by elephants and formidable with its lions, tigers and deer. Having penetrated into its depths, the powerful Viradha appeared before them emitting fearful cries. Lifting him up, as he was roaring like a great elephant, those two warriors threw him headlong into a pit and having accomplished that difficult exploit, the two brothers, Rama and Lakshmana, at dusk reached the enchanting hermitage of Sharabhanga. That Sage having ascended to heaven, Rama, a true hero, paid obeisance to the ascetics and thereafter went to Janasthana.
"Fourteen thousand titans, who dwelt in Janasthana, were slain during the time that the mighty Raghava resided there. For having fallen into the hands of the only Rama, during the fourth watch, those demons were wholly exterminated. Taking advantage of their great power, in order to harass the ascetics, those demons, inhabitants of the Dandaka Forest, were slain by Rama in combat. The demons slain and Khara also, Rama then despatched Dushana and subsequently Trishiras. Thereafter a female demon, named Shurpanakha, accosted him and, bang ordered to do so, Lakshmana, rising, took up his sword and instantly cut off her ears and nose. Thus mutilated, that titan woman took refuge with Ravana.
"Then a redoubtable titan in Ravana's service, named Marica, assuming the form of a jewelled deer, beguiled Vaidehi, who, on beholding it, said to Rama,"'O My Beloved, capture it for me, it will enliven our solitude.'
"Raghava, bow in hand, rushed out in pursuit of that deer and destroyed it with a single arrow, O My Friend.
"While Raghava, however, was thus engaged in the chase, Lakshmana too had left the hermitage, and Dashagriva, entering there, speedily took hold of Sita, as Graha seizes Rohini in the sky. Slaying the Vulture Jatayu, who sought to deliver her, the titan, taking hold of Sita, departed in all haste for his capital. Meanwhile some strange looking monkeys, as large as hills, standing on the summit of a mountain, astonished, observed Ravana, the King of the Titans proceeding with Sita in his arms; and, mounting into the sky with her in the Chariot Pushpaka, which was as swift as thought, the all-powerful Ravana returned to Lanka. There he entered bis vast palace decorated with pure gold and, with many words, sought to console Vaidehi but she, regarding his speech and his person with disdain and as less than a straw, was imprisoned in the Ashoka Grove.
"Meantime Rama returned, having slain the deer in the forest and, as he did so, he beheld the vulture so beloved of his sire, dead, at which he suffered extreme distress. Thereafter Raghava with Lakshmana set out in search of Vaidehi and they crossed the Godavari River with its flowering woodlands.
"In the great forest, the two princes met a titan, named Kabandha, counselled by whom that true hero repaired to the Mountain Rishyamuka in order to confer with Sugriva and, even before they met, they were firm friends.
"Sugriva had formerly been banished by his irascible brother Bali and, in consequence of this meeting, a sound alliance was formed between them. Rama, by the strength of his arms established him on the throne, having slain Bali, that giant full of valour, in the field. Regaining his kingdom, Sugriva vowed in return to set out with all the monkeys in order to find the princess and, under the command of their magnanimous sovereign, ten kotis of those Plavamgamas repaired to different regions.
"Whilst, discouraged, we were resting on the lofty Vindhya Mountain, plunged in despair, a long time passed. Meanwhile the powerfiil brother of the King of the Vultures, named Sampati, informed us that Sita was dwelling in Ravana's palace, whereupon I, whom you seest here, was able to dispel the grief of my companions and, resorting to mine own prowess, crossed over a hundred leagues of sea and discovered Maithili alone in the Ashoka Grove, dad in a soiled silken does, stained with dust, afflicted yet faithful to her conjugal vow. Approaching that irreproachable lady I paid obeisance to her and bestowed a ring on her in Rama's name as a pledge, and she, in her turn, gave me a brilliant jewel.
"My mission accomplished, I returned and gave Rama that token, the bright gem; and he, receiving tidings of Maithili, regained his zest for life, as one, who in extremity, drinks Amrita. Summoning up his strength, he resolved to overthrow Lanka, as, when the time has come, Vibhabasu prepares to destroy the worlds.
"Reaching the shores of the sea, the Prince commanded Nala to construct a causeway and the army of valiant monkeys crossed the ocean on that bridge.
"Prahasta fell under the blows of Nila, Kumbhakarna under those of Raghava, Lakshmana slew Ravana's son and Rama, Ravana himself. Having been received by the Granter of Boons, Shakra, as also Yama, Varuna and Mahadeva, Svyambhu and Dasaratha, Rama was showered with favours by all the Rishis. The glorious Kakutstha, Scourge of His Foes, was rendered happy by obtaining these boons and returned to Kishkindha accompanied by the monkeys in the Chariot Pushpaka.
"He has reached the Ganges once more and is dwelling with the Sage (i.e., Bharadvaja), where without hindrance, you should behold him to-morrow, when the Pushya Star is in an auspicious aspect I"
Thereupon, hearing Hanuman's delightful words, Bharata, full of joy, paid obeisance to him and, in accents pleasing to the heart, said,"After a long time my desires are at last fulfilled!"