Then Ravana, the conqueror of hostile armies, let his gaze wander over the assembly and addressing himself to the General of his forces, Prahasta, said:—
"O General, it is for you, who art conversant with the four branches of strategy, to dispose of your forces in the way that the defence of the city demands."
Thereupon Prahasta, alert to his sovereign's behests and eager to carry them out, distributed the whole of his troops within and without the fortress and, having disposed of his entire army in the city's defence, he returned to his seat in front of the king and said:—
"O Mighty Lord, I have stationed your forces within and without the city, now accomplish that which you have resolved to do speedily and without anxiety!"
At these words of Prahasta's, that monarch, who aspired to happiness and who was devoted to the public welfare, expressed himself thus amidst his followers:—
"Should duty, pleasure or self-interest endanger whatever is pleasant or unpleasant, whether it be in prosperity or adversity, gain or loss, whether useful or disadvantageous, you are bound to point it out. No undertaking of mine, that I have engaged in with you, re-inforced by the recitation of sacred formulas, has ever proved fruitless! As the Maruts, the moon, the stars and the planets follow in Vasava's wake, so do you all follow me in a splendid procession assuring me of victory!
"In truth I intended to mobilize you all but, on account of Kumbhakarna being asleep, I have not pressed this matter! After sleeping for six months, the foremost of those bearing arms, has just risen. As regards the beloved consort of Rama, the daughter of Janaka, I brought her here from the solitudes of the Dandaka Forest which is frequented by titans. That princess of languid pace does not wish to share my bed, though in the Three Worlds, I see none to compare with her. Slender-waisted, with well developed hips, her countenance resembling the autumnal moon, she is like an image made of gold created by Maya. Her palms are rosy, her feet are delicate and well set, her nails coppery and, seeing her, I am overcome with desire. Shining like the flame of the sacrificial fire she rivals the brightness of the sun; her face with its arched nose is flawless and fair, her eyes beautiful. On beholding her I am no longer master of myself and become the slave of love. Tom between anger and delight, this passion has proved my undoing, the cause of tuin and the eternal source of pain and suffering. In anticipation of the advent of her lord, Rama, that lovely largeeyed lady has solicited a year's grace of me and I have looked with favour on the request of that one of tender glances but, like unto a spent steed on the highway, I am weary of the pricks of passion.
"How will those inhabitants of the woods cross the impassable ocean with the innumerable monsters that inhabit it and how can those two sons of Dasaratha traverse it? The outcome of this enterprise is impossible to predict. Say what you think in this matter! A mere man causes no apprehension; yet ponder on it carefully!
"Formerly, in the war between Gods and Titans, thanks to your support I was victorious and you are still ready to stand by me.
"Having ascertained where Sita is, those two princes, preceded by the monkeys with Sugriva at their head, have reached the shores of the sea. It is not for us to return Sita but to destroy the two sons of Dasaratha, therefore deliberate on this and adopt a judicious line of conduct. In truth, I know of none in the world who can overcome us, even should he cross the water with the monkeys; victory is therejjare indubitably mine."
Hearing the ramblings of that bashful lover, Kumbhakarna flew into a transport of rage and said:—
"On first seeing Sita, the consort of Rama, who is accompanied by Lakshmana, she who was brought here by force, your mind was wholly possessed by her as the waters of the lake are filled by the Yamuna. O Great King, this conduct is not worthy of you! You should have consulted us at the outset of this affair. The king who acquits himself of his obligations punctiliously, O Ten-faced One, and whose mind is concentrated on what he is about, has not to repent later! Those undertakings that are carried out carelessly and against the scriptural law turn out badly, like unto impure offerings poured into the sacrificial fire by those who are heedless. To seek to end where one should begin or to begin where one should conclude is to ignoie what is proper and what is not. If an adversary examines the defects of one who is unrestrained, he soon discovers his weak points, as birds the fissures in the Krauncha Mountains. You didst make this assault without forethought and it is fortunate that Rama did not slay you, as poisoned food the eater thereof 1 Nevertheless I shall do my part in this campaign that you dost contemplate launching against thine enemies, O Irreproachable One! I shall destroy thine adversaries, O Ranger of the Night, even as Indra, Vivasvat, Pavaka, Maruta, Kuvera or Varuna themselves, I shall fight against them!
"Entering the combat with my enormous body, the size of a mountain and my sharp teeth, roaring the while and brandishing my immense mace, I shall strike terror into Purandara himself!
"Ere the foe can deliver a second blow, I shall drink his blood, therefore take comfort, for by slaying Dasaratha's son I shall bring you an auspicious victory! Having destroyed Rama as also Lakshmana, I shall devour all the monkey leaders! Enjoy thyself therefore and drink the most excellent of wines to the extent of your desire without anxiety; do what you judgest to be best!
"When I have despatched Rama to the region of deathj Sita will be at your disposal for ever."