Hearing those marvellous tidings, Bharata, that real hero, the slayer of hostile warriors, delighted, issued a command to Shatrughna, saying,"Let all righteous men, having purified themselves, worship all the Deities and sacred altars of the city with fragrant garlands and diverse musical instruments. Let the bards conversant with the tradition and all the panegyrists, with the queens, ministers, guards, the army, the courtiers, brahmins, nobles and the foremost of the artisans issue forth from the capital in companies, in order to behold the countenance of Rama, which is as lovely as the moon."
At this behest, Shatrughna, the slayer of hostile warriors, called together some thousands of labourers, whom he divided into groups, and he said to them,"Fill up the hollows and level the uneven ground from Ayodhya to Nandigrama. Sprinkle every part with water as cold as ice and let others scatter roasted grain and flowers everywhere; set up large standards on all the main highways of the capital. At the rising of the sun, let all the dwellings be adorned with crowns and garlands, with many flowers and decorations in five colours; let contingents of soldiers stand along the royal highway to keep it free."
At this command from Shatrughna, which filled everyone with joy, Dhristi, Jayanti, Vijaya, Siddhartha, Arthasadhaka, Ashoka, Mantrapala and Sumantra set out. Thousands of elephants intoxicated with ichor and female elephants with golden girths, bearing standards, splendidly adorned, on which illustrious warriors were mounted, issued forth, whilst others set out on horses and in chariots also, and warriors armed with spears, cutlasses and nets, furnished with banners and pennants were escorted by the foremost of their leaders and thousands of infantry.
Thereafter the litters, bearing the consorts of King Dasaratha, with Kaushalya and Sumitra at their head, also set out. And Bharata, ever fixed in his duty, surrounded by the Twice-born, the elders of the city, the merchants and counsellors with garlands and sweetmeats in their hands, rejoiced by the sound of conches and drums, his praises sung by panegyrists, having placed the sandals of the illustrious Rama on his head, took up the white parasol decorated with bright garlands and two golden chowries made of Yaks tails, worthy of a king. Then that magnanimous prince, emaciated by long fasting, pale, wearing robes of bark and a black antelope skin, yet full of joy at the tidings of his brother's approach, set out with his escort to meet Rama and the sound of the horses hooves, the noise of the chariot wheels, the blare of conches and beat of drums, the roaring of elephants, the blast of trumpets and booming of gongs caused the earth to tremble as the whole city proceeded to Nandigrama.
Thereafter Bharata, glancing round, said to Hanuman, the son of Pavana,"Is it due to the levity of your monkey nature that I do not behold Kakutstha, the illustrious Rama, Scourge of His Foes? Neither are those monkeys, able to change their form at will, to be seen 1"
To these words, Hanuman, testifying to the truth, answered the virtue-loving Bharata, saying,"That sylvan army has reached the trees covered with fruit and flowers, flowing with honey, where the humming of bees intoxicated with love can be heard. All this was created by virtue of a boon bestowed by Vasava on the Sage Bharadvaja, as a reward for his great hospitality. One can hear their shouts of delight and, to my mind, those monkeys have crossed the River Gaumati. Observe that immense cloud of dust near the wood; in mine estimation, the monkeys are shaking the boughs of the Sala Trees; behold that aerial chariot, bright as the moon, which can be seen in the distance, it is the celestial Car Pushpaka created by Brahma's thought and was obtained by that hero after he had slain Ravana and his kinsfolk. Glittering like the rising sun, that celestial chariot, swift as thought, that is bearing Rama, belongs to Dhanada, who received it from Brahma. In it are the two valiant brothers, offspring of the House of Raghu, accompanied by Vaidehi, the supremely illustrious Sugriva and the Titan Bibishana."
At that moment, from women, children, youthful persons and the aged, the joyful clamour 'Rama has come!' arose, reaching the skies.
Alighting from their chariots, elephants and horses in order to go on foot, the people beheld that prince standing in his aerial car, resembling the moon in the sky. With joined palms, Bharata advanced joyfully to meet Rama, to whom he paid obeisance, offering him water wherewith to wash his hands and feet, as also the Arghya.
In that chariot, created by Brahma's thought, the elder brother of Bharata with his large eyes, looked as radiant as the God who bears the Thunderbolt. Then Bharata, with a deep bow, paid reverence to his brother Rama, who was seated in the car, like unto the sun on the summit of Mount Meru, and at Rama's command, that swift and excellent vehicle, harnessed to swans, descended to earth. Then the faithful Bharata approaching Rama, full of joy paid obeisance once more, and Kakutstha, drawing Bharata to him, whom he had not seen for a long time, caused him to sit on his lap, embracing him affectionately. Thereafter, Bharata, the scourge of his foes, approached Lakshmana and Vaidehi and saluted them lovingly; then the son of Kaikeyi embraced Sugriva, Jambavan, Angada, Mainda, Dvivida, Nila and Rishabha also, and Sushena, Nala, Gavaksha, Gandhamadana, Sharabha and Panasa, clasping them in turn in his arms.
In the form of men, those monkeys, able to change their shape at will, gaily wished Bharata good fortune; then, after embracing him, that prince, full of valour, said to Sugriva, that lion among monkeys,"We are four brothers, you shalt be the fifth, O Sugriva; benevolence creates friendship and malevolence enmity 1"
Thereafter Bharata addressed Bibishana in comforting words, saying,"Be you blessed; your co-operation ensured the success of this difficult enterprise!"
At that instant, Shatrughna, having paid obeisance to Rama and Lakshmana, bowed reverently to the feet of Sita. Then Rama approached his mother, who was pale and drawn with grief and, prostrating himself, touched her feet, thus rejoicing her heart, after which he saluted Sumitra and the renowned Kaikeyi, thereafter paying obeisance to the other Queens and his spiritual preceptor.
Then all the citizens, with joined palms said to Rama,"Be you welcome, O Long-armed Hero, you are the increaser of Kaushalya's delight!"
To the elder brother of Bharata, those thousands of hands joined in salutation caused the inhabitants of the city to appear like a lotus in flower.
Then Bharata, conversant with his duty, himself took Rama's sandals and fastened them on the feet of that Indra among Men and thereafter, with joined palms, said to him,"This kingdom that I received in trust, I now render back to you in its entirety. To-day, since I see you as Lord of Ayodhya, the purpose of mine existence has been fulfilled and my desires consummated. Now examine your treasury, your storehouses, thine house and thine army; by your grace, I have increased them tenfold!"
These words uttered by Bharata out of fraternal love, caused the monkeys and the Titan Bibishana to shed tears. Thereafter, in his joy, Raghava made Bharata sit on his lap and, with his chariot and army, proceeded to the hermitage.
Reaching that place with Bharata and his troops, Rama alighted from his aerial car and thereafter spoke to that most excellent chariot, saying,"Now go hence and place thyself at Vaishravana's disposal, I give you leave to depart."
Thus dismissed by Rama, that excellent car proceeded in a northerly direction and reached Dhanada's abode. The celestial Car Pushpaka, which had been borne away by the Titan Ravana, returned at Rama's command with all speed to Dhanada.
As Shakra touches the feet of Brihaspati, Raghava, having touched the feet of his friend, his spiritual preceptor, seated himself by his side, a little way apart, on an excellent seat.