Raising his joined palms to his forehead, Bharata, the increaser of Kaikeyi's delight, said to his elder brother, Rama, that true hero,"You have honoured my mother by conferring the kingdom on me; now I give back to you that which was entrusted to me. How can I, who am but a young steer, bear the heavy load that one full grown is scarcely able to sustain? To my mind, it is as hard to preserve the boundaries of this kingdom as to build up a dam which has been swept away by a torrent. How can a donkey outpace a horse or a crow surpass a swan in flight? Nor am I able to follow in your footsteps, O Hero, O Scourge of Your Foes! As a tree with a vast trunk and branches, planted in a courtyard, that has grown immense and difficult to climb, dries up when it has blossomed without yielding any fruit, so, O Long-armed Prince, if, being our master, you dost not uphold us all, we your servants, are in the same case!
"Let the universe to-day witness thine enthronement, O Raghava, you who art as radiant as the sun at noon in all its effulgence. From henceforth, let it be to the sound of gongs, the tinkling of girdles and anklets and the gentle strains of melodious singing that you dost wake and fall asleep. Do you rule the world as long as the sun revolves and the earth endures."
Hearing Bharata's words, Rama, the conqueror of hostile cities, answered 'So be it!' and took his place on an excellent seat.
Thereafter, at the command of Shatrughna, skilled and defthanded barbers quickly surrounded Raghava; and first Bharata bathed and the mighty Lakshmana also, then Sugriva, that Indra among Monkeys, followed by Bibishana, the Lord of the Titans; whereupon Rama, his matted locks shorn, performed his ablutions and he was clothed in robes of great price, covered with garlands and sprinkled with every kind of perfume; thereafter he re-appeared blazing in his own effulgence. The hero, Bharata, attended on Rama's robing and Shatrughna, the upholder of the prosperity of the Ikshvakus, on Lakshmana's, and all the consorts of King Dasaratha attended on Sita. Kau-shalya, in love of her son, herself adorned all the consorts of the monkeys with joy.
Then Shatrughna, having issued the command, Sumantra harnessed a magnificent chariot and when that celestial car, bright as flame, had been brought before him, Rama, that long-armed warrior, conqueror of hostile citadels, took his place therein. Sugriva and Hanuman, whose beauty equalled Mahendra's, bathed and attired in robes of divine loveliness and sparkling earrings, followed; thereafter Sugriva's consorts, as also Sita, advanced eager to behold the capital.
In Ayodhya all the ministers of King Dasaratha, with Rama's spiritual Preceptor Vasishtha, at their head, took counsel as to what ought to be done; and Ashoka, Vijaya and Siddhartha, with undivided mind, entered into consultation regarding the honours to be paid to Rama by the city and said,"Prepare all that is needed for the coronation of the magnanimous Rama, who is worthy of this honour, beginning with the benedictory prayer."
Having issued these orders, the ministers as also the spiritual Preceptor set forth from the city in haste, in order to behold Rama, who resembled the God of a Thousand Eyes in his chariot drawn by bay horses. And Raghava, seated in his car, proceeded along the highway to his capital; Bharata took up the reins, Shatrughna the parasol, Lakshmana the fan and Sugriva one of the chowries, whilst that Indra among the Titans, Bibishana, held the second that was made of Yaks tails of dazzling whiteness and like unto the moon, waving it to and fro over the prince, behind whom he stood. At that instant, the sweet music of Rama's praises rang out in the sky sung by companies of Rishis and Gods with the Marut Hosts.
The illustrious Sugriva, that bull among the monkeys, was mounted on an elephant named Shatrumjaya, as high as a hill, and nine thousand elephants carried the monkeys, who in the form of men, proceeded along the way, adorned with ornaments of every kind.
Then that Lord of Men advanced towards the city encircled with palaces, to the sound of conches and the roll of drams; and the inhabitants of the city beheld Raghava radiant with beauty advancing in his chariot, and, having exchanged salutations, they took up their places behind Kakutstha, the magnanimous Rama, surrounded by his brothers. In the midst of his counsellors, the brahmins and the people, Rama shone with splendour like unto the moon amidst the stars; and, as he advanced along the highway, preceded by the musicians and those who bore the Svastika on the palms of their hands, he was attended by a joyous crowd. Before Rama marched those who carried roasted grain and gold, and virgins and kine were there with the Twice-born and men with their hands full of Modaka (a kind of sweetmeat).
Meantime Rama informed his ministers of his alliance with Sugriva and of the prowess of the son of Anila; and the monkeys and the inhabitants of Ayodhya were astounded by the narrative concerning the monkeys' exploits and the valour of the titans. Whilst relating these incidents, the illustrious Rama, who was attended by the Vanaras, entered Ayodhya, which was filled with healthy and happy people, and where every house was decorated.
Thereafter they came to the ancestral dwelling, the abode of the descendants of Ikshvaku, and that prince, the delight of the House of Raghu, paid obeisance to Kaushalya, Sumitra and Kaikeyi and thereafter addressed Bharata in gentle and reasonable words saying,"Let Sugriva stay in the magnificent palace, set amidst the woods in the Ashoka Grove, which abounds in pearls and emeralds."
At these words, Bharata, that true hero, took Sugriva by the hand and led him into the palace. Meanwhile servants bearing oil lamps, couches and carpets entered immediately as commanded by Shatrughna and the exceedingly valiant younger brother of Raghava said to Sugriva,"Do You, O Lord, issue your commands for Rama's coronation!"
On this, Sugriva gave over four golden urns encrusted with gems to the monkey leaders, saying,"To-morrow, at dawn, see to it that you return with your urns filled from the four seas, O Monkeys."
At this command, those powerful monkeys, resembling elephants, immediately rose into the air, so that they looked like swift eagles, and they were Jambavan, Hanuman, Vegadarshin and Rishabha, who brought back their urns filled with water, whilst five hundred other monkeys drew water in their jars from five hundred rivers. The mighty and valorous Sushena returned with his vessel, adorned with every variety of gem, bearing water from the eastern sea; Rishabha, without delay, brought water from the southern sea; Gavaya, with his urn powdered with red sandal and camphor, filled it at the vast ocean of the west, and Hanuman, the marvellous son of Anila, who was as swift as the wind, with his huge urn, encrusted with diamonds, drew water from the icy northern sea.
Beholding the water brought by those foremost of monkeys for Rama's coronation, Shatrughna, attended by servants, imparted the tidings to the chief Priest Vasishtha, and his companions, and that venerable one hastened there with the brahmins, whereupon he caused Rama accompanied by Sita, to ascend a throne inlaid with precious gems. Then Vasishtha, Vijaya, Javali, Kashyapa, Katyayana, Gautama and Vamadeva consecrated that lion among men with pure and fragrant water, as the Vasus crowned Vasava of a Thousand Eyes.
Then the Ritvijs and the Brahmins with sixteen virgins, counsellors, warriors, as also the merchants, were full of joy and Rama was sprinkled with pure water, and the Celestial Beings, standing in the firmament with the Lokapalas and the Gods assembled to anoint him with the juice of all the sacred herbs.
And having been crowned by the magnanimous Vasishtha, the priests placed royal vestments upon him; and Shatrughna bore the immaculate shining canopy, and Sugriva, the King of the Monkeys, the chowry made of Yaks tails, the Lord of the Titans, Bibishana carrying the second, that was as bright as the moon. Thereafter, on Vasava's command, Vayu bestowed on Raghava a brilliant golden garland embellished with a hundred lotuses, and a necklace of pearls enriched with every variety of gem was also conferred on that Lord of Men by Shakra.
The Gods and Gandharvas sang and troops of Apsaras danced at the installation of the virtuous Rama, who was worthy of that honour. The earth too was covered with rich crops and the trees with their fruit and flowers gave forth their fragrance in honour of Raghava. Hundreds and thousands of horses, cows and heifers were distributed amongst the Twice-born by that prince, who had already bestowed hundreds of bulls on the brahmins; and Raghava gave them thirty crores of gold and rich attire and priceless ornaments.
Then a golden crown encrusted with precious stones, glittering like the sun's rays, was offered to Sugriva by that valiant leader of men, who bestowed two bracelets set with emeralds, the lustre of which rivalled the moon's, on Angada, the son of Bali. And Rama gave unto Sita a necklace of pearls embellished with gems that was without peer and like unto moonbeams, and celestial and immaculate raiment richly embroidered with superb ornaments. Then Vaidehi, the delight of Janaka, prepared to bestow her own necklace on the son of the Wind as a token and, unclasping it from her neck, she looked on all the monkeys and on her lord again and again, whereupon Rama, understanding her gesture and approving it, said to the daughter of Janaka,"Give the necklace to whom you pleases, O Lovely and Illustrious Lady!"
Thereupon the dark-eyed Sita gave the necklace to the son of Vayu, and Hanuman, in whom courage, strength, glory, skill, capability and reserve, prudence, audacity and prowess were ever to be found, that lion among monkeys, adorned with that necklace, looked as radiant as a mountain covered by a white cloud silvered by an aureole of moonbeams.
Thereafter all the elder and leading monkeys received fitting gifts of jewels and raiment, whereupon Sugriva, Hanuman, Jambavan and all those monkeys having been overwhelmed with favours by Rama of imperishable exploits, and received precious gems in addition, according to their merits, with all that their hearts could desire, returned joyfully from whence they had come; and Rama, the scourge of his foes, lord of the earth, sought out Dvivida, Mainda and Nila and satisfied all their wishes.
Thereupon the festival which they had attended being terminated, the foremost of the monkeys took leave of that lord of men and returned to Kishkindha. And Sugriva, the King of the Monkeys, having assisted at Rama's coronation and being overwhelmed with honours by him, went back to his capital.
Thereafter, Bibishana, that virtuous monarch, having obtained the kingdom of bis forbears, returned to Lanka full of glory with the leading titans.
The supremely illustrious and magnanimous Raghava, having slain his foes, ruled his empire in peace, enhancing the joy of his people.
Devoted to virtue, Rama addressed Lakshmana who was fixed in his duty, saying,"O Faithful One, aid me in defending the land protected by the ancient kings with their armies. As was the custom of our ancestors in days of yore, do you share the weight of state affairs with me as heir presumptive."
Yet, despite the earnest entreaties addressed to him, Saumitri did not accept the dignity, and the high-souled Rama conferred it on Bharata. Thereafter that prince performed the Paundarika, Ashvamedha, Vajimedha and other sacrifices of many kinds again and again. Reigning for ten thousand years, he offered up ten horse sacrifices, distributing immense wealth in charity, and Rama, whose arms reached to his knees, the powerful elder brother of Lakshmana, ruled the earth in glory and performed many sacrifices with his sons, brothers and kinsfolk. No widow was ever found in distress nor was there any danger from snakes or disease during his reign; there were no malefactors in his kingdom nor did any suffer harm; no aged person ever attended the funeral of a younger relative; happiness was universal; each attended to his duty and they had only to look on Rama to give up enmity. Men lived for a thousand years, each having a thousand sons who were free from infirmity and anxiety; trees bore fruit and flowers perpetually; Parjanya sent down rain when it was needed and Maruta blew auspiciously; all works undertaken bore happy results and all engaged in their respective duties and eschewed evil. All were endowed with good qualities; all were devoted to pious observances and Rama ruled over the kingdom for ten thousand years.
This renowned and sacred epic, the foremost of all, granting long life and victory to kings, was composed by the Rishi Valmiki, and he who hears it constantly in this world is delivered from evil; if he desires sons he obtains them, if wealth he acquires it.
He who, in this world, listens to the story of Rama's enthronement, if he be a king, will conquer the earth and overcome his enemies. Women will obtain sons as Sumitra and Kaushalya obtained Rama and Lakshmana and Kaikeyi, Bharata.
The hearing of the 'Ramayana' grants longevity and victory equal to Rama's, he of imperishable exploits. The one who, mastering his anger, listens with faith to this epic, formerly composed by Valmiki, overcomes all obstacles and those who hear this story set forth by Valmiki will return from their journeys in foreign lands and rejoice the hearts of their kinsfolk. They will obtain fulfilment of all the desires they conceive in this world from Raghava, and its recitation will bring delight to the Celestials; it pacifies the adverse forces in those houses where it is to be found.
Hearing it, a king will conquer the earth; if he be a stranger he will fare well; women who hear this sacred epic in their pregnancy, will give birth to sons who are unsurpassed. He who recites it with reverence will be freed from all evil and live long. Warriors should listen to it recited by the Twice-born with bowed heads in order to achieve prosperity and obtain sons.
Rama is ever pleased with the one who hears this epic or who recites it in its entirety and he who does so will obtain a felicity comparable to Rama's, who is Vishnu, the Eternal, the Primeval God, the Long-armed Hari, Narayana, the Lord. Such are the fruits produced by this ancient narrative. May prosperity attend you! Recite it with love and may the power of Vishnu increase!
The Celestial Beings rejoice in the understanding and hearing of 'Ramayana' and the Ancestors are gratified. Those who, in devotion, transcribe this history of Rama, composed by the Rishi Valmiki, attain to the region of Brahma.
The hearing of this rare and beautiful poem in this world brings prosperous families, wealth and grain in abundance, lovely wives, supreme felicity and complete success in all undertakings.
This narrative which promotes long life, health, renown, brotherly love, wisdom, happiness and power should be heard in reverence by virtuous men desirous of felicity.