Seeing Ravana wrought up with ire, the mighty General Mahaparshva reflected a moment and, with joined palms, spoke thus:—
"He who, having penetrated into a wood frequented by wild beasts and serpents, does not partake of the honey he finds there, is a fool!
"Who is your master? You are the master, O Scourge of Your Foes! Enjoy thyself with Vaidehi, having placed your foot on the head of your foe! Act in the manner of a cock, O Valiant Prince! Approach Sita again and again in order to enjoy her and pass the time in dalliance with her. Having sated your passion, what is there to fear? Whether taken unawares or no, you are well able to meet every exigency! Without support Kumbhakarna and Indrajita of immense energy, would be capable of challenging the God who bears the Thunderbolt armed with his mace!
"Bestowal of gifts, conciliation and sowing dissension in the ranks of the enemy are the means of subduing them, according to the wise, but in the present circumstances, I incline to the use of the fourth 1 O Lord, we shall subdue your foes by the strength of our arms, do not doubt it!"
Thus spoke Mahaparshva and the king, thanking him, replied thus:—
"O Mahaparshva, I will answer you by recounting a strange adventure that befell me a long time ago.
"While she was going to worship the Grandsire of the World, I came upon the nymph, Punjikasthala, flashing through the sky like a flame. I stripped her of her attire in order to deflower her, after which like a faded lotus she reached the abode of Svyambhu.
The magnanimous Ordainer of the World, learning of the matter, addressed me in anger, saying:—
"'O Ravana, from to-day, if you dost violence to any other woman, your head will be split into a hundred pieces, this is certain!'
"This curse alarmed me and it is for this reason that I have not forced Sita, the Princess of Videha, to ascend the nuptual couch. My fury is like unto the sea and my speed resembles the wind but the son of Dasaratha is unaware of it and it is on this account he has set out to fight me. Who would seek to waken a lion lying asleep in a hidden mountain den whose anger resembles the God of Death himself?
"Ramacandra has not seen my arrows in combat that resemble snakes with forked tongues, wherefore he is considering marching against me. From my bow, loosing my shafts that are like unto lightning on him from a myriad sides, I shall speedily consume Rama, as a forest is set on fire by flaming brands. I shall wipe out his army with mine, as the rising sun blots out the light of the stars. Neither Vasava of a thousand eyes nor Varuna can withstand me in battle 1 It was by the strength of mine arms that I conquered the city defended by Kuvera!"