Prince Bibishana listened to the boasting of Ravana and the thundering of Kumbhakama and addressed the king in words that were profitable and sagacious, saying,"O King, why hast you brought that great serpent in the form of Sita hither, her breasts its coils, her anxieties its poison, her laughter its sharp fangs, her five fingers its five hoods? While Lanka is yet not assailed by those monkeys, armed with their teeth and nails, who are as high as hills, give back Maithili to the son of Dasaratha!
"Neither Kumbhakarna nor Indrajita, O King, neither Mahaparshva nor Mahodara neither Nikumbha nor Kumbha nor yet Atikaya are able to withstand Rama on the field of battle! You wouldst never escape from Rama alive even were you protected by Savitar or the Maruts or if you didst take refuge in the region of Yama or plunge into the lowest hell!"
Thus spoke Bibishana and Prahasta answered him saying,"We do not know what it is to fear the Gods or titans whoever they may be, nor do we stand in awe of Yakshas, Gandharvas nor great Serpents, gigantic birds nor great snakes in the field. Why then should we tremble to enter into combat with Rama, that son of a mortal king?"
Hearing this injudicious speech of Prahasta's, Bibishana, who sought to save the king and whose intellect was rooted in the values of virtue, profit and expediency, uttered these words full of good sense, saying:—
"O Prahasta, the intrigues proposed by the King, Mahodara, you and Kumbhakarna against me, born with qualities such as Rama possesses are as unlikely to succeed as the entry into heaven of one of perverse soul. It is impossible for me or you or Prahasta or all the titans to slay Rama, who is supremely experienced. It is as if we sought to cross the sea without a boat 1 In the presence of such a hero, essentially pious, that Prince of the Great Car, the issue of the Ikshvaku Race who is capable of any exploit, even the Gods themselves are confounded! It is because those sharp arrows, irresistible and furnished with heron's plumes, that are loosed by Raghava, have not as yet pierced your limbs, that you are still able to boast, O Prahasta! It is because those pointed shafts that Rama discharges, which quench the vital breaths and are equal to the lightning in their velocity, have not penetrated your body, that you dost still bluster in this wise! Neither Ravana nor the exceedingly powerful Trishiras nor the son of Kumbhakarna, Nikumbha nor Indrajita, nor even you thyself, are able to overcome the son of Dasaratha in combat, who is equal to Indra himself. Neither Devantaka nor Narantaka, neither Akampana, the magnanimous Atiratha nor Atikaya are capable of resisting Raghava in battle.
"You, the friends of this monarch who is dominated by passion, violent by nature and whose acts are thoughtless, flatter him, as though you were his foes, to the destruction of the titans! Rescue and deliver that king who is held fast in the illimitable coils of a serpent possessed of a thousand hoods and who is formidable and of exceeding energy. It is for the sovereign's friends, whose desires have been gratified by him, to save him, even were it by dragging him by the hair of his head, like one who has fallen a prey to fiends of immeasurable power. It is for you unitedly to rescue that monarch from the surging waters of the ocean Rama, he who is sinking into the mouth of the Kakutstha hell!
"I will here repeat those words that are to the advantage of the city, the titans, the king and the host of courtiers! I repeat them loyally and candidly 'Let Maithili be given back to that Prince!'
"He who, having estimated the strength of his foes, his own resources, the situation and the loss and gain of his undertaking and, after mature reflection, expresses himself frankly and judiciously to his master, is a true counsellor."