This speech of Bibishana's, who was equal to Brihaspati in wisdom, displeased the great Indrajita, Leader of the Nairrita Hosts, who replied to him thus, "What do these idle words fraught with fear signify, O Youngest of my Uncles? None other, even were he the issue of another race than our own, would speak thus or even conceive such thoughts! Valour, courage, endurance, steadfastness, audacity and strength are lacking in Bibishana alone, the youngest brother of my sire.
"Who are, in fact, these two sons of a king of men? One of us single-handed, were he the least of the titans, would suffice to exterminate them both! O Coward, from whence springs your fear? Was I not able to cast the Protector of the Three
Worlds to the ground, the Lord of the Devas himself? Struck with terror, the Hosts of the Gods scattered in all directions and the loudly trumpeting Airavata was brought down by me, whose tusks I rooted out, dispersing the celestial armies by my valour. I who humbled the pride of the Gods themselves and afflicted the Daityas, am I in mine immeasurable energy not able to subdue these two princes, insignificant mortals as they are?"
At this speech of that invincible and powerful rival of Indra, Bibishana the foremost of warriors answered him in words fraught with good sense, saying,"My Child, your reflections are worthless! You are young and thine intellect is not yet ripe; further, to our ruin, you are incapable of ascertaining what is expedient and inexpedient.
"Under the guise of a son, O Indrajita, you are in truth a hidden foe to Ravana and, hearing him prate of slaying Raghava, you dost support him. You dost merit death, as also he who had the grievous idea of bringing you here this day and introducing a youthful, rash and arrogant warrior into an assembly of counsellors! O Indrajita, you are thoughtless, imprudent, feeble of intellect, your mind ruined by folly and extreme frivolity and you speakest thus from childishness. Who can withstand the shock of those shining arrows which Raghava looses in combat resembling the Rod of Brahma, like unto fate or the Sceptre of Yama? Do you give back Sita to Rama with treasure, pearls, rich ornaments, celestial attire and gems, so that we may dwell here without anxiety, O King."