Bibishana, having uttered these words that were reasoned and full of good sense, Ravana replied in harsh accents, saying,"It were better to live as a declared enemy or with a venomous serpent than to dwell with one who, under the guise of a friend, is in league with the foe. The disposition of relatives who ever rejoice in others' misfortunes is well known, O Titan. Kinsfolk ever seek to bring down the one who is endowed with authority, energy, learning and loyalty and, should he be a hero, he is the more condemned by them. Constantly finding delight in the discomfiture of one another, their bows ready to strike each other down, their hearts full of deceit, they are both formidable and dangerous.
"Those verses formerly recited by the elephants in the Padma Forest, on seeing men with snares in their hands, are well known; I will repeat them to you,'Neither fire nor weapons nor traps strike terror into us but those of our own kind who are cruel and self-interested, it is they whom we fear! They alone, undoubtedly divulge the means of making us captive!'
"Of all perils, those that spring from relatives are the worst, this is known to us. From cows we have milk, from relatives malice, from women capriciousness, from brahmins asceticism. That I am held in honour by my subjects and have been called to rule over an empire by descent and have set my foot on the heads of mine enemies, will certainly not have found favour with you! As drops of water are unable to remain on the lotus leaves, so does friendship slip from the hold of worthless persons. As in autumn the thunderclouds, which empty themselves, fail to saturate the earth, so does friendship fail with the vicious. As bees fly away after they have sucked out the honey they have found, so do the unworthy relinquish a friendship after it has served their purpose. As the honey stealer in its greed, feeding on the Kusha Flowers, does not exhaust their nectar neither do the wicked savour friendship to the full.
"If any other had addressed such a speech to me, O Ranger of the Night, he would have ceased to breathe at that very instant! As for you, a curse upon you, O Obloquy of your Race!"
At this affront, Bibishana, who ever spoke what was true, rose up mace in hand with four other titans and, filled with indignation, that fortunate one, standing in space, said to his brother, the King of the Titans,"You have lost your reason, O King, but say what you will, an elder brother is the equal of a father and must be reverenced even if he leave the path of equity; nevertheless I am unable to tolerate these outrageous utterances of thine! Words of wisdom that are dictated by a desire for the welfare of others, O Tennecked One, are not acceptable to those who are not masters of themselves and have fallen under the sway of death 1 Those who make flattering speeches are easy to find but rare are they who utter salutory though unpleasing words or those who will listen to them 1 I could not brook seeing you caught in the noose of death, who bears away all beings, neither did I desire to see you pierced by the sharp and golden arrows of Rama resembling flaming torches. Even stout-hearted persons full of skill and courage fall in combat and are carried away like walls of sand if death overcomes them. You should accept this counsel on account of its import for thine own good 1 By every means defend thyself as well as this city and the titans! In thine own interest I sought to restrain you but my words have not found favour with you, O Ranger of the Night. Fare-you-well, I go; you will be happier without me! At the point of death, those whose life has run its course do not listen to the advice of their friends!"