Hearing the words of the Wind-god’s son, the invincible Rama, versed in the scriptures, answered him and, expressing his own conclusions, said,"I also have reflected on Bibishana and wish to make the result known to you, O You who art established in virtue! I shall never refuse to receive one who presents himself as a friend, even were I mistaken no honest man could reproach me for it."
At these words, Sugriva, that lion among monkeys, reflecting carefully, replied in more reasonable words and in eloquent terms addressed Rama, saying,"What matters it if this ranger of the night be well or ill-intentioned, if in time of peril he abandons his brother, whom will he not betray subsequently?"
At these words of the King of the Monkeys, Kakutstha looked round on that company and, smiling gently, said to Lakshmana, distinguished for his saintly characteristics,"He who has not studied the scriptures nor possessed reverence for authority could not utter such words as have been expressed by the Lord of Monkeys! There is however something peculiar in these circumstances, it seems to me, which is particularly to be seen in monarchs. Kings have two avowed enemies, their kinsmen and their neighbours, who turn against them in times of adversity; this is what brings this titan here!
"Relatives who are not of a perverse nature, honour those of their own family who have treated them well but in the case of kings even a virtuous relative is suspect! As to the fault that you point out which consists in accepting the assistance of a foe, I will tell you what the scriptures say on this, hear me!
"We are not related to the titans and it is not our kingdom that he covets. It is certain his compatriots are informed about Bibishana’s departure and for this reason we should receive him. They will have assembled with joy and without anxiety and thereafter the cry ‘This one or that is afraid’, will have created a division amongst them; this is what has brought about Bibishana’s arrival here.
"All brothers, O Dear One, do not resemble Bharata nor all sons what I was to my sire nor do all friends resemble each other."
Thus spoke Rama, and Sugriva rising, as also Lakshmana, bowed low and thereafter that exceedingly sagacious monkey said,"Know that it is Ravana who has sent out this ranger of the night 1 I regard it as imperative that we should make an end of him, 0 You, the most circumspect of persons I This demon under the order of a perverse creature has come hither to make an assault on you, myself and Lakshmana, when we are unprepared for it, O Irreproachable Warrior. He merits death, this Bibishana, brother of that inhuman Ravana, as well as his accomplices."
Having spoken thus to the eloquent prince of the House of Raghu, Sugriva, the leader of the army, a fluent speaker became silent and Rama, having listened to Sugriva, that lion among monkeys, reflected awhile and then addressed that foremost of monkeys in measured terms, saying,"Whether this titan be ill-intentioned or no, what does it matter, he cannot do me the least mischief. On earth, Pisacas, Danavas and Yakshas, as also the titans can be slain by me with the tip of my finger, if I so desire it, O King of the Monkeys.
"It is related how a pigeon with whom his adversary had taken refuge entertained him and invited him to partake of his own flesh, even though he was the ravisher of his mate. Such was the hospitality offered by a pigeon; what should therefore a man like myself not do?
Hearken to these verses, pre-eminently sacred, sung aforetimes by the son of Kanva, that great ascetic of truthful speech, Kandu,"‘A miscreant who approaches with joined palms, seeking refuge, should not in the name of humanity be slain even if he be a foe, O Parantapa! The unfortunate or the fearful who plead for shelter or throw themselves on the mercy of their enemy, should be protected by him who is master of himself. If, conforming to the tradition, one does not render assistance according to one’s capacity, either for reasons of fear, delusion or anger, one is reproached by all and the suppliant, who perishes before the eyes of the one of whom he has sought help in vain, carries away all his merit!’
"Therefore it is a heinous crime not to give shelter to those who petition it on this earth; it is to deprive oneself of heaven and glory and to lose one’s strength and prowess! Consequently I shall follow the excellent counsel of Kandu, which is pious, honourable and leads to heaven as the fruit of merit. Any being who has sought refuge with me, saying—‘I am thine’ is assured of my protection, I swear it! Bring this stranger to me, 0 Monkey, I shall offer him security whether he be Bibishana or Ravana himself!"
Thus did Rama speak and Sugriva, the King of the Monkeys, answered that son of Kakutstha, whom he held in deep affection, thus,"What wonder is it that you who art loyal, virtuous and established in righteousness, you who shinest like a jewel in the head of kings, should speak thus? I, also, in my heart, am convinced of Bibishana’s integrity. Deduction, feeling, everything has been used to probe this matter thoroughly; let him be admitted immediately amongst us on equal terms, O Raghava! Let Bibishana, who is full of wisdom, join our alliance!"
At these words of Sugriva, the King of the Monkeys, Rama immediately joined Bibishana as Purandara the King of the Birds.