Raghava having accorded him protection, the younger brother of Ravana, the highly intelligent Bibishana bowed to him, looking down on the earth.
Thereafter he descended joyously from the sky to the ground with his faithful companions and that virtuous one ran towards Rama and, falling at his feet with the four titans, addressed him in words full of loyalty and discretion, fitting the occasion,"I am Ravana's younger brother and I have been greatly affronted by him. I have therefore come to seek refuge with you, the protector of all beings! Abandoning Lanka, friends and possessions, I place my kingdom, life and happiness at your disposal!"
At these words, Rama, in soothing tones, while seeming to consume him with his gaze, said,"O Bibishana, tell me truly what is the strength and weakness of the titans?"
Thus questioned by Rama of imperishable exploits, that titan described the might and extent of Ravana's power, saying,"By virtue of a special boon conferred on him by Svyambhu, Dashagriva is invulnerable to all beings, Gandharvas, Serpents and Birds, O Prince. I have also another brother older than myself, the valiant Kumbhakarna, the illustrious rival of Indra in war.
"O Rama, Ravana has Prahasta commanding his forces, who is perhaps known to you. It is he who vanquished Manibhadra in combat on Mount Kailasha! When clad in armour that no arrow can pierce, furnished with his archer's gloves, Indrajita, taking up his bow, makes himself invisible, and on the battlefield, having propitiated the God of Fire, that fortunate one sows carnage amongst the foe, O Raghava. Mahodara, Mahaparshva and the Titan Akampana, who are his lieutenants, resemble the Lokapalas on the field of battle.
"Ten thousand kotis of titans, able to change their form at will, feeding on flesh and blood, inhabit Lanka. At their head, their sovereign the wicked Ravana made war on the supporters of the earth as also the Gods who were all overcome by him."
Having listened to Bibishana and weighed his words carefully, Rama expressed himself thus,"These exploits of Ravana's that you have faithfully described are well known to me; I shall slay Dashagriva as also Prahasta and his sons; thereafter I shall install you as king; believe me, this is the truth! Were he to plunge into the region of Rasatala or even Patala or take refuge with the Grandsire of the World, he would not escape alive! Before I have annihilated Ravana with his sons, his kinsfolk and his allies in battle, I shall not return to Ayodhya, I swear it by my three brothers I"
Thus did Rama of imperishable exploits speak and the venerable Bibishana bowing unto him, said,"In the slaying of the titans and the capture of Lanka, I will assist you with all my strength; I will break through the enemy's ranks."
As he spoke thus, Rama embraced him and thereafter he commanded Lakshmana saying,"Do you bring water from the sea and anoint the sagacious Bibishana as King of the Titans under my direction, O Noble Brother 1"
Thereupon Saumitri, in accord with Rama's behest, performed the royal anointing in the midst of the leading monkeys and immediately those monkeys, beholding Bibishana raised to that supreme rank, acclaimed that magnanimous titan, crying: "Excellent! Excellent!
Meanwhile Hanuman and Sugriva enquired of Bibishana, saying,"How shall we, with the mighty army of monkeys who surround us, cross the ocean, that indestructible empire of Varuna? What means should we employ to traverse the refuge of the Lord of Streams and Rivers speedily with our troops?"
At this question, the virtuous Bibishana answered,"That Prince, the offspring of the Race of Raghu, should approach the ocean that was excavated by Sagara and he will assuredly help one of his own race".
Thus spoke Bibishana, that sagacious titan, and Sugriva instantly went away with Lakshmana to join Rama.
Thereafter the thick-necked Sugriva conveyed to him this salutory counsel of Bibishana's to take refuge with Sagara and it found favour with the virtuously minded Rama. Then that illustrious prince replied to Sugriva, the King of the Monkeys, who was accompanied by Lakshmana. Full of respect for that monkey, who sought to gratify him in every way, he smiled upon him as also on his brother Lakshmana and said,"This plan of Bibishana's pleases me, O Sugriva and Lakshmana. Sugriva is sagacious and was ever a prudent counsellor: do you both reflect on the matter and say what you consider to be best."
Having spoken thus to them, those two warriors Sugriva and Lakshmana answered in respectful tones, saying,"How should the counsel of Bibishana not find favour with us in these circumstances? He brings us the means to success. Without throwing a bridge over the sea, that redoubtable dominion of Lanka will remain inaccessible even to the Gods and titans with their leaders. Let us carry out the suggestion of the virtuous Bibishana scrupulously; enough time has been lost Let us approach Sagara, so that with our army we may reach Lanka of which Ravana is the support."
At these words, Rama proceeded to the shore that was covered with Kusha Grass belonging to the Lord of Streams and Rivers as the God of Fire ascends the altar.