That army of warriors in well-ordered, formations looked splendid with the radiance Rama conferred on it which resembled the full moon on a starry night, and the earth, pressed under foot by the energetic tread of that multitude like unto the sea, trembled with fear.
Meanwhile those inhabitants of the woods heard a great tumult arising in Lanka and the formidable rolling of drums and clashing of gongs caused their hair to stand on end. This clamour filled the leaders of the monkeys with joy and, in their ardour, they emitted shouts that surpassed that uproar, and the cheering of the Plavamgamas, resembling the rumble of thunder in the skies, reached the ears of the titans.
Seeing Lanka dressed with many coloured banners, the son of Dasaratha bethought himself of Sita and his heart was filled with grief. He reflected—
'It is there that that youthful woman, whose eyes resemble a gazelle's, is held captive by Ravana, like Rohini when she is overpowered by the red-bodied planet'.
Heaving long and burning sighs, that hero looked at Lakshmana and spoke words fitting to the occasion to him, "See, O Lakshmana, this marvellous city, built by Vishvakarma on the summit of the mountain, set aloft so that it appears to lick the skies, where innumerable palaces duster like unto the aerial abode of Vishnu covered with white douds; Lanka with its blossoming groves looks magnificent like Caitaratha which is filled with the song of birds of every kind and glowing with fruit and flowers! See how a gentle breeze sways the branches from which the birds dart, where bees swarm and where cuckoos abound."
Thus did Rama, the son of Dasaratha address Lakshmana and thereafter ranging his forces according to the traditional methods, he issued the following commands to that army of monkeys.
"Let the valiant and invincible Angada place his troops in the centre with the General Nila. Surrounded by the simian battalions, Rishabha should establish himself on the right wing of the army, and he who resembles an elephant in mustha, the indomitable and courageous Gandhamadana, should place himself at the head of the left flank. I shall go to the forefront of the army with Lakshmana as mine aide-de-camp and Jambavan, Sushena and Vegadarshin to spy out the land.
"Those three high-souled ones, the leaders of the bears, should protect the centre of the forces and the rearguard be under the command of the Lord of Monkeys, as the western region is dominated by the sun of brilliant rays."
The innumerable divisions being thus skilfully distributed, that army, led by the foremost of monkeys armed with boulders and huge trees, resembled the heavens with its mass of clouds; and those monkeys advanced on Lanka that they were eager to destroy.
"It is with the peaks of mountains that we shall demolish Lanka or if need be with our bare fists!" such was the resolve of those powerful monkeys.
At that instant the exceedingly valiant Rama said to Sugriva,"Our forces are properly marshalled, now let Shuka be released 1"
Under the order of that Indra of Monkeys, who was full of energy, Ravana's agent was set at liberty. Released on Rama's command and harassed by the monkeys, Shuka, in a frenzy of terror went to seek out the King of the Titans, whereupon Ravana with a sneer enquired of him,"What is the meaning of your fettered wings? Why are your flanks tom? Hast you fallen into the power of those capricious monkeys?"
Thereupon Shuka, wrought up with fear, pressed by his exceedingly powerful sovereign, made this reply,"Repairing to the northern shore of the sea in order to deliver your message faithfully by employing gentle and soothing tones, those barbarous Plavamgamas, barely having caught sight of me, hurled themselves upon me and began to beat and pound me with their fists. It was quite impossible to enter into any form of mediation with them or discuss anything; those monkeys are ferocious and violent by nature, O Lord of the Titans! The slayer of Viradha, Kabandha and Khara, Rama, however, who is accompanied by Sugriva, is searching for Sita. Having thrown a bridge over the sea and traversed the salty waves, that archer, Raghava, has come hither and sets the titans at nought.
"The bears and monkeys, gathering in thousands of divisions equal to mountains or clouds, cover the earth. There is no more possibility of an alliance between the monkeys and the titans than between a God and a demon! Before they reach the ramparts decide quickly how you will act; either restore Sita to Rama or enter into conflict with him!"
Thus spoke Shuka and Ravana, his eyes red with anger, looked at him as if he would consume him with his glance and said,"Even had I to enter into conflict with the Devas, Gandharvas and Danavas, I would not restore Sita, were the whole earth to shake! When will my shafts fall on Raghava as the intoxicated bees fall on the blossoming trees in Spring? When, with mine arrows, shall I consume his body flowing with blood as flaming torches destroy an elephant.
"His forces will suffer eclipse before my powerful army as the brilliance of the stars at the rising of the sun. That son of Dasaratha is not aware that I possess the strength of Sagara and the swiftness of Maruta, that is why he desires to meet me in combat. Rama has not yet seen the shafts resembling venomous serpents that repose in my quiver; that is why he wishes to enter into combat with me! That Raghava is not yet conversant with my great might nor with the Vina in the form of my bow that I pluck with mine arrows, the bow-string producing a formidable sound, the cries of the wounded its terrible accompaniment, the darts its innumerable notes and which, when I enter the river of the enemy ranks as into a vast arena, I shall cause to resound on the field of battle!
"Neither the thousand-eyed Vasava in person nor Yama of the fiery missiles nor Vaishravana himself is able to overcome me in battle!"