Rama, the son of Dasaratha, having traversed the ocean with his army, the boastful Ravana addressed his counsellors Shuka and Sarana, saying:—
"The entire army of monkeys has crossed the impassable ocean on a bridge constructed by Rama, an unprecedented exploit! I never deemed it possible to throw a causeway over the sea!
"Introduce yourselves into their ranks without being discovered and inform me exactly regarding the number and prowess of those monkey leaders, the counsellors who customarily attend on Sugriva and Rama and the scouts and warriors among them; further how the dyke was constructed over the waters of the sea; how the army advances, of their plans and of the strength and weapons used by Rama and the courageous Lakshmana."
At this command, the two Titans, Shuka and Sarana, assuming the form of monkeys, boldly entered into the simian ranks but they were unable to count the monkey host which was endowed with unimaginable energy causing the hair to stand on end and which amidst the caves and waterfalls spread over the summits of the mountains. From every side those divisions came, some having crossed, some crossing and some still to cross, and those who were arriving or had still to come, emitted loud roars and, to those rangers of the night, resembled the infinite sea.
Now the illustrious Bibishana recognized Shuka and Sarana under their disguise and arresting them denounced them to Rama, saying:—
"Here are two followers of the King of the Titans who have come to spy out conditions, O Conqueror of Hostile Citadels!"
Terrified at the sight of Rama and despairing of their lives, the two demons, with joined palms, said to him in great fear:—
"O Most Cherished Issue of the House of Raghu, we have been sent by Ravana to find out about the whole army!"
Hearing these words, Rama, the son of Dasaratha, who delighted in the welfare of all beings, smiling, answered them, saying:—
"If you have inspected the whole army and examined their positions carefully and fulfilled the mission entrusted to you, then return in peace. But if there is anything you have not investigated and you still wish to see, then Bibishana will show it to you fully. Your arrest should not cause you any apprehension with regards your lives, you are envoys and, having laid aside your arms, have been taken captive; you do not merit death!
"O Bibishana, set these two rangers of the night free, who have come in disguise to spy on us with the intention of creating division amongst their foes.
And you, when you return to the great City of Lanka, repeat my words faithfully to the King of the Titans, saying:—
"'That force on which you didst rely when taking Sita away from me, employ freely with the aid of your troops and allies. To-morrow at break of day, you shalt see mine arrows demolish the Qty of Lanka with its ramparts and arches as well as the army of titans! My dreadful ire will fall on you and your forces at dawn, O Ravana, as the God bearing the Thunderbolt,Vasava, discharges it on the Danavas!'"
Receiving this command, the two Titans, Shuka and Sarana, admiring his justice, cried out:—"Mayest you be victorious!" and paid obeisance to Rama.
Returning to Lanka, they said to the Lord of the Titans:—"Bibishana took us captive with the intention of slaying us, O King, but Rama, he whose valour is immeasurable, seeing us, let us go!
"In that place four of the foremost monkey leaders are assembled who are equal to the Protector of the Worlds. Their warriors, skilled in the use of weapons, of proved prowess, are Rama the son of Dasaratha, the fortunate Lakshmana, Bibishana and the highly energetic Sugriva, whose strength is equal to the great Indra's.
"Even without the monkeys themselves taking part, they are able to penetrate into this City of Lanka with its walls and arches and tear up the foundations and transplant them elsewhere. Such is Rama's capacity and such his weapons that he could overthrow the city single-handed, his three companions standing by! Under Rama, Lakshmana and Sugriva's protection that army is completely invincible even against the Gods and Asuras combined! Now that army of powerful and aggressive monkeys, dwellers in the woods, is breathing war; it is useless to dispute with them. Make peace and restore Maithili to the son of Dasaratha!"