Hearing the sincere and courageous utterance of Sarana, the King Ravana, answered,"Even did the Gods, Gandharvas and Danavas unitedly seek to attack me and were all beings to tremble, I would not restore Sita; O Friend, having been roughly handled by the monkeys you dost fear them and for this deemest it opportune for me to give up Sita! What adversary is able to ovetcome me in war?"
Having uttered this arrogant speech, Ravana, the Lord of the Titans, in order to survey the horizon, proudly went up to his palace that was as white as snow and as high as innumerable palm trees. Accompanied by his ministers, Ravana, who was transported with anger, swept the mountains, forests and ocean with his glance and he beheld the entire region covered with Plavamgamas.
Seeing that illimitable and invincible army of monkeys, Ravana enquired of Sarana, saying,"Who are the leaders of these monkeys? Who are their warriors? Who their princes? Who are those marching at their head in order to demonstrate their valour? Who are Sugriva's counsellors and his generals? Tell me all, O Sarana! What is the strength of these monkeys?"
Sarana, thus interrogated by that Sovereign of the Titans being well-informed, pointed out the leaders of those dwellers in the woods to him.
He said: "That monkey who stands before Lanka roaring amidst a hundred thousand leaders who escort him, whose powerful voice shatters the whole city with its walls, gates and arches, its rocks, forests and jungles and who is in command of the army of the magnanimous Sugriva, Lord of all the Deer of the Trees, is the valiant General Nila.
"He who holds his arms high and who tramples the earth under his feet as he marches, that hero whose face is turned towards Lanka and who, in fury, yawns convulsively, who resembles the peak of a mountain in stature and the filaments of a lotus in hue, who, in an excess of anger, continuously lashes out with his tail, the swish of which is heard in the ten regions, that warrior whom Sugriva, the King of the Monkeys, installed as heir-apparent, is named Angada and he is challenging you to combat. That warrior, the equal of his sire, Bali, is beloved of Sugriva and as devoted to Raghava's interests as Varuna is to Shakra's. That Janaka's daughter has been seen by Hanuman, who is as swift as the wind and the servant of Raghava, is all due to the advice of Angada. Having formed innumerable battalions with the foremost of monkeys, that warrior is marching against you at the head of his army in order to destroy you.
"Close to Bali's son and himself surrounded by a considerable number of troops, the valiant Nala, the builder of the bridge, stands ready on the battlefield.
"Those soldiers clad in saffron colour, who are stretching their limbs, roaring and gnashing their teeth, are following the one who boasts that he will overthrow Lanka with his forces: it is Shveta of silver hue, who is exceedingly agile and brave; that intelligent monkey, a warrior renowned in the Three Worlds has come to take his orders from Sugriva and will leave at once to place the army of monkeys in strategic positions and inspire enthusiasm amongst his divisions.
"That one who formerly ranged the Mountain Ramya, that is also called Samrocana on the borders of the Gaumati River and which is covered with trees of varying fragrance, ruled over a kingdom there, is the General Kumuda and that other, who joyfully draws in his train hundreds and thousands of warriors with long hair and immense tails hanging down, who are coppery-coloured, yellow, black, white and matted, hideous to look upon, is the intrepid Monkey Kanda. He yearns to fight and boasts that he will destroy Lanka with his forces.
"The third, who resembles a tawny lion with a great mane and whose gaze is fixed attentively on the city as if he wished to consume it with his glances, who dwells mostly on the Mountains Krishna and Sahya of the Vindhya Range of pleasing aspect, is the General Rambha, O King. Three hundred kotis of the most valiant of monkeys who are formidable, impetuous, burning with ardour surround him and follow in his steps for the purpose of causing the destruction of Lanka by their blows.
"The one who is shaking his ears and yawning continuously, who, when facing death remains immoveable and who never retreats in the face of a hostile army but eyeing them askance foams with rage; he who lashes out with his tail and gnashes his teeth, that hero of immense energy, wholly devoid of fear, O King, has his abode on the ravishing Mountain of the Salveyas and the name of that leader is Sharabha; to him belong forty hundred thousand monkeys named Viharas.
"The one who is like unto a great cloud enveloping space and who, surrounded by monkey warriors, resembles Vasava amidst the Gods, whose voice like the roll of a drum, can be heard from the midst of the monkeys, who is eager to fight, dwells in Pariyatra, a mountain that is exceeded by none in height; that general ever invincible in combat is named Panasa. That commander with fifty lakhs of lieutenants, each of whom leads his own battalion, who shines resplendent amidst the host of monkeys of terrifying bounds, who are encamped on the seashore like unto a second ocean, he who resembles Dardura is called General Vinata. In his wanderings he drinks the waters of the Vena, that most excellent of rivers. His army is composed of sixty thousand Plavamgamas and that monkey, named Krathana, challenges you to combat. His lieutenants are full of daring and vigour and each commands a battalion. That monkey whose body is well nourished and who is of the colour of red ochre, who, in the pride of his strength ever holds the other monkeys in contempt, is the illustrious Gavaya. He is advancing towards you full of fury and seventy hundred thousand warriors accompany him; he also boasts that he will lay Lanka waste with his troops.
"Those invincible heroes may not be numbered and the flower of their captains are each at the head of his own particular force."