Beholding that head and the marvellous bow and remembering the alliance with Sugriva of which Hanuman had spoken; seeing those eyes and the hue of the countenance resembling that of her lord and the locks at the fringe of which a jewel shone on the brow, all those signs that convinced her of her misfortune, that wretched woman began to inveigh against Kaikeyi and cry out like an osprey, exclaiming:—
"Rest content, O Kaikeyi! He, who was the delight of his House is dead and, through you, the entire race has perished, O Sower of Discord! What had the noble Rama ever done to Kaikeyi that she should have presented him with a robe of bark and sent him to the forest?"
Speaking thus, Vaidehi began to tremble and that young ascetic fell to the ground like a plantain cut to the roots. After a time the youthful large-eyed woman, regaining her breath and consciousness, approached the head and gave herself up to lamentation, crying:—
"Alas! I am undone! O Great-armed Warrior, faithful to thine heroic vow, bereft of you, I have fallen into the lowest depth of calamity. It is said that for a woman, the death of her husband is the greatest of misfortunes! Virtuous consort of a faithful companion, you have preceded me in death! I have fallen into the last extremity and am swallowed up in an ocean of grief, since you have been struck down, you who else had risen to deliver me! My mother-in-law, Kaushalya, who cherished you tenderly, you, her son Raghava, now resembles a cow that has lost its calf. Those who boast that they can foretell the future prophesied a long life for you; false were their words, for you have barely lived, O Rama, or does prudence perchance sometimes desert those who are usually prudent as you were, for time, the master of all beings brings all to maturity? How has death been able to steal upon you unawares, O You, versed in the law of polity and the science of expediency, who were so skilled in warding off evil? For having clasped me in thine arms, that cruel and inhuman night of death has robbed you of existence by force, O Lotus-eyed One. Here art you, lying on the ground, O Long-armed Warrior, having deserted me for the earth, your more cherished love, O Lion among Men! O Hero, here lies your golden bow so dear to me, which I anointed with perfumes and decorated with garlands! You are now re-united in heaven with your Sire Dasaratha, my father-in-law and all thine ancestors, O Irreproachable Prince!
"You dost disdain to rejoin the saintly race of Rajarishis, who through the merit of their virtuous conduct have taken their places amongst the constellations. Why dost you not look on me, O King? Why dost you not speak to me, I, your spouse, who joined my youth to thine? Dost you not recall the promise made to me when, taking my hand in thine, you didst say 'I shall be your companion?' O Kakutstha, take me with you, wretched as I am!
"Why, leaving this world for the other hast you abandoned me in mine affliction, O You, the wisest of Sages? Wild beasts are tearing that beautiful body, now a corpse, which was formerly perfumed by my hands with divine essences. Having performed the Agnihotra and other sacrifices, accompanied by the bestowal of splendid gifts in charity, how is it that you are not honoured by the performance of that same ceremony?
Kaushalya, a prey to grief will see Lakshmana alone return of the three who went into exile On her enquiry he will inform her of the destruction of thine allies and how you were slain while asleep, whilst I was taken into the abode of the titans, whereupon her heart will break; Kaushalya will not survive, O Raghava! Miserable creature that I am, it is on my account that the irreproachable Rama who is full of valour, having crossed the ocean has perished in the footprint of a cow. It was in an ill-judged moment that the son of Dasaratha wedded me, I, the obloquy of my race, for thus did the illustrious Rama wed death. Without doubt in a previous existence I refused a rare gift,11 who to-day weep for my lord, who here was dear to all.
"O Ravana, unite the wife with the husband and, without delay, let me die near Rama. Join my head with his head and my body with his body; O Ravana, let me follow in the path of my magnanimous lord!"
Thus in her burning grief did that large-eyed princess, born of Janaka, lament on seeing the head and bow of her lord and, as Sita was thus bewailing, a titan, who was standing guard at the gate, ran to his master with joined palms, crying:—
"Mayest you be victorious, O Noble Lord!" thereafter, approaching, he informed him of the arrival of Prahasta, the leader of the army, saying:—
"Prahasta, accompanied by all the ministers, has come hither to find you! O Mighty Monarch, you whom the burden of royalty has rendered forbearing, accord him audience for some urgent decision must be taken!"
Hearing these words of the titan, Dashagriva left the Ashoka Grove and went to join his counsellors. Then, having deliberated with them as to what action to pursue, he entered the council chamber and issued his commands in accordance with the knowledge he possessed of Rama's forces.
Meanwhile the instant Ravana had departed, the illusory head and bow vanished.
Then, the King of the Titans, in consultation with his highly powerful ministers, decided on the measures he would adopt against Rama. All the generals devoted to his interests stood near and Ravana the Lord of the Titans resembled Death the Destroyer while he addressed them, saying:
"With the beating of drums, summon all the forces without further explanation!"
"So be it!" they answered obedient to his commands and instantly gathered the vast army together and, when they were all assembled, informed the king who was burning to fight.