Seeing Sita in distress, that dear Vaidehi whom she loved so tenderly, a female titan named Sarama approached her and, with gentle words, sought to console her, overwhelmed as she was with the grief and anguish into which that Indra among the titans had plunged her.
The affectionate Sarama, beholding Sita distraught, resembling a mare, who having rolled in the dust has just risen, reassured her and, in her deep devotion for that virtuous princess, said to her, "That which Ravana uttered and what you thyself didst reply was overheard by me as I stood concealed in the solitary grove, for where you are the cause, I have no fear of Ravana, O Lady of Large Eyes! And I have also learnt, through my perspicacity, why that Lord of the Titans has gone hence in fear, O Maithili.
"It is not possible to take the prudent Rama by surprise during sleep nor can one slay the foremost of those conversant with the Self nor is it possible to wipe out the monkeys who fight with trees and who are under Rama's protection like the Gods under the King of the Celestials. With his long rounded arms, that broad-chested powerful archer, full of fire, clad in mail, who is essentially virtuous and renowned in the world, has, with the support of his brother Lakshmana, ever known how to defend himself and others; he, that illustrious warrior versed in the science of politics and warfare, the exterminator of hostile battalions, of inconceivable courage, nay that fortunate Raghava, the scourge of his foes, has not perished, 0 Sita.
"Perverse in thought and action, that tyrant who oppresses all beings, made use of magic to deceive you. Banish your grief, great happiness awaits you! Assuredly you are beloved of Lakshmi; now hear some pleasant tidings, O Blessed One!
"Having crossed the ocean with his army of monkeys, Rama has come to the southern shore where he has encamped. I perceive that Kakutstha, who is accompanied by Lakshmana, has fully attained his purpose, he is secure in the midst of innumerable allies who have halted on the shores of the sea.
"Zealous titans sent out to reconnoitre by Ravana have brought him news of Raghava's crossing the ocean. Learning of this, O Large-eyed Princess, he held a council of his ministers."
While Sarama, the titan woman, was conversing thus with Sita, a terrifying clamour issuing from the full-throated titans came to her ears and a great din of gongs struck with sticks could be heard. Thereupon the gentle-speaking Sarama said to Sita, "Listen to that formidable clang of gongs struck with sticks which resembles thunder. Intoxicated elephants are saddled and steeds harnessed to chariots; hosts of combatants are to be seen with darts in their hands mounted on their horses, fully equipped, rushing hither and thither in their thousands. The royal highways are choked with soldiers wonderful to behold, leaping and roaring like the waves of the sea. Glittering armour, breast-plates, shields, chariots, horses and elephants belonging to the titans full of fire and courage, surging forward, follow in the wake of their king. See how they send forth shafts of light of every hue. That multitude of titans indicates that a terrible calamity is about to descend on them causing the hair to stand on end.
"Rama, your consort, whose eyes resemble lotus petals, like unto Vasava the Vanquisher of the Daityas, will win you back by slaying Ravana in combat by his unimaginable prowess, whereupon, his anger appeased, he will take you away. Your lord with Lakshmana will fall on the titans as Vasava with Vishnu on his enemies the Daityas. I shall soon see you in the lap of Rama who has come hither, all your desires fulfilled and the tyrant fallen. Tears of joy will fall from thine eyes, O Janaki, when your lord, re-united with you, will hold you clasped to his breast. Ere long, O Divine Sita, that mighty Rama will loosen the plait that hangs down your back which you have worn these many months.
"Beholding his radiant countenance resembling the full moon, O Queen, you will renounce your tears, born of grief, as the female snake casts off its slough.
"Having destroyed Ravana in combat, he will assuredly not delay in rejoicing you, O Maithili, you, his beloved, so that he may enjoy the felicity he merits. Embraced by the magnanimous Rama, you shalt be happy, even as the open field bringing forth a harvest under plenteous showers. Do you now seek refuge with him, O Queen, that sun, thine haven, which spreads from here to the highest of mountains, like a steed that courses rapidly in its path, he is the Lord of all beings!"