Sita, who had been overwhelmed with misery on hearing Ravana's words, was comforted and rendered happy by Sarama, as the parched earth by rain. Desiring to be of further service to her friend, the affectionate female titan, skilled in the knowledge of time and place, smiling, began to speak in apposite terms, saying,"O Dark-eyed Lady, I am able to carry a message of goodwill from you to Rama and return secretly, for when I am journeying in the sky, that is extended without support, not even Pavana or Garuda can follow in my wake."
Thus spoke Sarama, and Sita, her voice no longer charged with grief, answered in gentle and caressing tones, saying,"You are capable of ascending to heaven itself or descending into the nethermost regions. Learn what is best for you to do, if thine intention is to please me and your resolve is fixed. I wish to know what Ravana is doing now. That powerful magician, the ruthless Ravana, a real Ravana to his foes, has bemused me with his wickedness as wine recently imbibed; he threatens me continually and insults me unceasingly while titans of frightful aspect surround me; I am a prey to terror and my spirit is uneasy. He causes me to tremble with fear in this Ashoka Grove where I am confined. If in the assembly there be any talk of delivering me or keeping me captive, then communicate the decision taken to me and you will render me a great service."
Thus spoke Sita and Sarama answered in gentle tones, wiping the tears from her face the while,"If this be your wish, I will go at once and when I have discovered his design, I will return, O Maithili, O Daughter of Janaka!"
With these words she returned to where Ravana was to hear what decision he had taken with his ministers.
Having listened secretly and learnt of the plans that perverse wretch had made, she returned to the enchanting Ashoka Grove. On entering there, she beheld the daughter of Janaka waiting for her, like unto Lakshmi bereft of her lotus.
Thereupon Sita ardently embraced Sarama who had returned and addressed her in friendly tones, offering her het own seat, saying,"Rest at ease and tell me exactly all that the ruthless Ravana of perverse soul has resolved to do."
Then Sarama described the whole interview of Ravana with his ministers to the trembling Sita, saying,"The mother of the King of the Titans, through an aged counsellor, who is devoted to her, insisted again and again that they should let Vaidehi go, saying,"'Let them return Maithili honourably to that King of Men 1 His astonishing exploits in Janasthana should be a lesson to you; what mortal could have accomplished the crossing of the ocean, the discovery of Sita by Hanuman and the carnage of the titans in combat?'
"Thus did the elderly minister and his mother exhort him but he is no more capable of giving up his treasure than a miser his gold. He will never set you free unless he is shin in combat, O Maithili; such is the resolve of that wicked wretch made with his counsellors; impelled by death his determination is fixed. Fear will never cause Ravana to let you go; nor will he do so till he is struck down by weapons or all the titans and he himself have succumbed. When he has destroyed Ravana with his sharp arrows in combat, Rama will take you back to Ayodhya, O Dark-eyed Lady!"
At that moment the cheering of the whole army blended with the roll of drums and the blare of trumpets arose and the earth shook. That tumult raised by the monkey forces was heard by the adherents of the King of the Titans, who were assembled in Lanka, and their spirits fell. Seeing no hope on account of their sovereign's offence they were plunged in despondency.