It was to the beating of gongs and the blare of trumpets that the long-armed Rama, the conqueror of hostile cities, approached Lanka and, on hearing this tumult, the Lord of the Titans paused a moment to reflect and then addressed his ministers.
The mighty Ravana, in a voice that resounded through the hall, began to decry Rama, his valour, the strength of his arms and his crossing of the ocean, saying:—
"I have heard all that is reported of Rama; I know too of your courage in the field, yet, on beholding that valiant warrior, you now look on each other in silence!"
Thereupon hearing the words of Ravana, whose maternal grandfather he was, the highly intelligent Titan Malyavan answered him thus:—
"O King, that monarch who is versed in the fourteen sciences, who follows polity, rules an empire over a long period and overcomes his adversaries, who concludes peace or wages war at a fitting time, advances his own party and attains great power. A monarch should ally himself to one stronger than himself or to an equal; he should never underrate a foe and if he is more powerful, should make war on him. On this account I counsel an alliance with Rama and the return of Sita who is the actual cause of the dispute. Devas, Rishis, Gand-harvas, all desire him to triumph; do not wage war but resolve to make peace with him!
"The blessed Grandsire created two paths that rest either on righteousness or unrighteousness, the path of the Gods and the path of the titans. Righteousness is the path of the magnanimous Immortals and unrighteousness that of the demons and titans. When virtue consumed evil, it was the Krita Age and when wrong-doing swallowed up virtue, the Tishya planet was in the ascendant and you, adopting unrighteousness, didst range the worlds destroying virtue; it is on account of this that your foes have waxed powerful! The serpent of evil, nourished by your folly, is now consuming us, while those allied with the Gods are fortified by their practice of virtue. A slave of the senses, all that you undertakes! excites the wrath of the ascetics, those personifications of the Fire-God whose power is as irresistible as the glowing flames. They purify their souls through austerities and find satisfaction in the performance of their duty. In truth, those Twice-born offer innumerable and excellent sacrifices, kindling the sacred fire in accordance with prescribed rituals; they recite the Vedas in a loud voice and utter sacred texts while subduing the titans. Scattered in all directions, like the stormy waves during the hot season, the smoke, arising from the Agnihotra performed by those Rishis, the equals of Agni, spreads over the ten cardinal points and diminishes the titans' energy. In the various regions sanctified by their religious observances, the burning austerity of those ascetics torments the titans.
"You have received the boon of invincibility from Devas, Danavas and Yakshas but these are men, bears and powerful Golangulas who, full of energy and prowess, are coming hither roaring like lions. Beholding these sinister and formidable portents of every kind, I foresee the total extermination of the titans. With a terrifying clamour, monstrous clouds, inspiring horror, rain hot blood on Lanka on every side. Those beasts drawing the chariots are shedding tears. Discoloured with dust, the four quarters no longer shine; serpents, jackals and vultures are invading Lanka, gathering in the public squares with frightful cries; standing before us in dream, coal black women with white teeth resembling Kali burst into loud laughter, pillaging the dwellings and chattering incoherently; in the houses, dogs devour the sacred offerings and donkeys are born of cows, rats of mongoose; cats mate with tigers, pigs with dogs and Kinneras with demons and men. Red-footed and white pigeons, messengers of death, by their flight foretell the extermination of the titans; domesticated parrots, falling under the attack of other birds, call 'Chichikuci'! Birds and wild beasts, their eyes fixed on the sun, cry out! Death in the shape of a human monster, deformed, bald and tawny-coloured, visits the dwellings in turn. These and other omens equally sinister appear. Raghava of fixed prowess is, I deem, Vishnu in human form; he is undoubtedly no mere man; he who built a bridge over the deep is an exceedingly wonderful being! Therefore, O Ravana, for thine own good, conclude peace with Rama who is the king of men."
Having spoken thus, Malyavan, the bravest of warriors, aware of what was passing in Ravana's mind, eyeing him, became silent.