Dashanana could not brook Malyavan's salutory utterances and, scowling, a prey to anger, tolling his eyes in fury, answered him thus:—
"I have closed mine ears to the speech you have made, albeit with good intentions; how canst you hold a mere man like Rama, who is single-handed, without any support but that of the deer of the trees, cast off by his sire and exiled to the forest, to be of my stature, I, the Lord of the Titans, the terror of the Gods? Dost you then consider me to be destitute of power?
"I am at a loss to determine if it be envy of my prowess or predeliction for the foe that has brought you to address such hard words to me, unless it be that you desirest to spur me on! In truth, what man learned in the science of the Shastras would speak thus harshly to a seasoned warrior, were it not to incite him?
"Having borne Sita away from the forest, she who resembles Shri bereft of her lotus, why, through fear, should I return her to Raghava? You shalt see him fall under my blows in the midst of the innumerable monkeys who surround him. How should Ravana, whom the Deities themselves dare not meet in single combat, experience fear in this encounter? Rather would I be cut in twain than bend before any I Such was I from birth, it is my nature and unalterable! Even if Rama by some happy chance has been able to throw a bridge over the sea, what great marvel is there in that, that you should give way to terror? It is true he has crossed the ocean with an army of monkeys but I swear to you he will not return alive."
Beholding Ravana to be highly provoked and speaking with such fury, Malyavan, abashed, did not reply and duly invoking his success as courtesy demanded, he begged permission to retire.
Meanwhile Ravana, assisted by his ministers, having deliberated on what ought to be done, set about planning the defence of Lanka.
Thereafter he gave over the eastern gate to the Titan Prahasta and that of the south to the warriors Mahaparshva and Mahodara. At the western gate he placed his son Indrajita, a powerful magician, with a considerable force of titans and he established Shuka and Sarana at the northern gate, saying:—
"I myself shall take up that position also!"
Finally he commanded the Titan Virupaksha, who was full of energy and courage, to occupy the centre of the city with a large number of soldiers.
Taking every precaution for the safety of Lanka, that bull among the titans, under the sway of destiny, deemed his purpose accomplished. Having made provision for the defence of the dty, he dismissed his ministers and received the acclamations of the assembly, after which he entered his sumptuous inner apartments.