Meanwhile that King of Men, the Sovereign of the Monkeys, the Son of the Wind, Jambavan the King of the Bears, the Titan Bibishana with Bah's son Angada and Saumitri, the Ape Sharabha, also Sushena and his kinsfolk Mainda and Dvivida, Gaja, Gavaksha, Kumuda, Nala and Panasa, all having reached the enemy's territory, assembled to take counsel together.
They said, "Yonder under our very eyes is the Qty of Lanka defended by Ravana, impregnable even to the Gods and Asuras together or the Uragas and Gandharvas. Let us take counsel as to what means to adopt that will ensure the success of our expedition in order to penetrate into the eternal retreat of Ravana, the King of the Titans."
At this, the younger brother of Ravana, Bibishana, uttered these words that were both just and irreproachable,"Anala, Panasa, Sampati and Pramati have been to Lanka from whence they have returned. Assuming the form of birds, all four entered that hostile citadel and studied the measures taken by Ravana closely. I will give a detailed report as it was given to me of the defences organized by that perverse wretch; O Rama, hear me!
"At the eastern gate, Prahasta is stationed with his division; at the southern gate are the warriors Mahaparshva and Mahodara; Indrajita is at the western gate where he is in command of a considerable force armed with harpoons, swords, bows, spears and hammers. Ravana's son has thousands of warriors under his command, holding lances in their hands, furnished with weapons of every kind.
"Apprehensive, a prey to great anxiety, Ravana, versed in the sacred formulas, is himself stationed with the titans at the northern gate. As for Virupaksha, he, with a strong detachment armed with spears, clubs and bows occupies the centre of the dty.
"Having seen these hosts thus distributed, my spies have set out in all haste and returned again. The elephants number some ten thousand, the cavalry twenty thousand and there are more than a million foot soldiers. Hardy and vigorous, these intrepid warriors have ever been their sovereign's favourites; each of the titan generals, when on campaign, commands a million soldiers, O Lord of Men."
Having conveyed this information concerning the city, the mighty Bibishana brought his envoys before Rama and those titans confirmed all that was known regarding Lanka. Thereafter the younger brother of Ravana, in his desire to please Raghava, addressed that Lotus-eyed One further, saying,"O Rama, when Ravana made war on Kuvera, seven million soldiers accompanied him. For vigour, daring, energy, extreme power of endurance and pride, they equalled their wicked king. There is no question here of my wishing to agitate you by what I have said but a desire to rouse thine indignation, not your fears, for in knightly valour, you are equal to the Gods themselves. Having set out these monkey forces in battle at ray, you shalt destroy Ravana with your great army composed of four angas which surround you."
Bibishana having spoken thus, Raghava gave his orders for the attack, saying,"At the eastern gate, Nila, that lion among monkeys, should oppose Prahasta with his innumerable infantry and let Bali's son, Angada, at the head of a strong division, drive away Mahaparshva and Mahodara from the southern gate; that son of the Wind, whose valour is immeasurable, will penetrate into the city with his great forces.
"I reserve the right to slay the wicked King of the Titans, who owing to the boon he has received enjoys oppressing the Daityas and Danavas as also the magnanimous Rishis and who ranges the worlds persecuting all beings. With the aid of Saumitri I shall force an entry through the northern gate and follow in the wake of Ravana and his army. Let the mighty Indra among Monkeys, the valiant King of the Bears and the younger brother of the Lord of the Titans occupy the central position.
"The monkeys should not assume human form in the fray for, when we are fighting in the ranks, the monkey shape should serve as a sign of recognition amongst us. Seven will attack the foe in human form, I, my brother Lakshmana, who is full of valour, my friend Bibishana and his four companions."
Having said this to Bibishana for the success of the enterprise, Rama, in the role of a wise leader, decided to stay on Mount Suvela whose ravishing slopes he had observed.
Thereafter at the head of his great army which spread over the earth, the magnanimous Rama set out for Lanka with a joyous and exultant air, resolved to destroy his enemy.