Then Rama, accompanied by Sugriva and his monkey leaders, ascended the summit of Mount Suvela that had a circumference of two leagues; there he halted awhile, surveying the ten cardinal points and his gaze fell on Lanka which was ravishing with its enchanting groves that had been built by Vishvakarma on the summit of the Trikuta Mountain.
There above a gateway stood the invincible Lord of the Titans, white chanvaras being waved above him and the triumphal parasol indicating his rank. Anointed with red sandal-paste, adorned with scarlet ornaments, he was attired in raiment embroidered with gold and resembled a dark cloud. The scars of the wounds, inflicted on him by Airavata with his tusks, pitted his breast, and he was wrapped in a cloak of the colour of hare's blood so that he appeared like unto a cloud dyed with the tints of sunset.
The Indra of the Monkeys beheld him as Raghava also and, on seeing him, Sugriva, gathering up his strength, in an impulse of fury suddenly bounded from the summit of the mountain and descended at the gate. For a moment he paused, then with a fearless soul he eyed that titan whom he regarded as a mere straw and thereafter addressed him harshly, saying,"I am the friend of the Protector of the Worlds, Rama; by the grace of that King of Kings you shalt not escape me today."
Speaking thus he suddenly leapt upon him and, snatching off his brilliant diadem, threw it on the earth.
Seeing him about to rush upon him again, that Ranger of the Night said to him,"Sugriva you were unknown to me, now you shalt be Hinagriva!"
Speaking thus, he threw himself upon him and with his two arms flung him to the ground. Bouncing up like a ball, that monkey struck his adversary in his turn and perspiration broke out on the limbs of both and their bodies were red with blood; each clung to the other, paralysing his opponent's movements and they resembled the Shalmali and Kimshuka Trees.
Then followed blows and slaps with hands and arms and an indescribable struggle arose between the two powerful kings, the Lords of the Titans and Monkeys. Hard and long was the combat between these two doughty champions in the gateway, each in turn lifting the other up, crouching and changing their positions, tripping each other and throwing each other down, crushing one another, bruising each other's limbs, and, falling between the Sala Trees and the moat, they would leap up again, pausing an instant to regain their breath. Then, with arms interlaced like ropes, they remained locked together, struggling and furious, full of skill and energy, moving to and fro. Like a lion and a tiger or two young elephants, that have just grown their tusks, scrutinising each other, with arms interlaced and grappling with one another, they fell on the earth together. Thereafter, rising, they hurled themselves on each other afresh, circling round the arena again and again, like skilled and mighty wrestlers nor were they easily fatigued. Like unto great tuskers, with their enormous arms resembling the trunks, they gripped each other tightly. Grcling round and round in that duel which was long and fierce, they trampled down the earth and, approaching each other, like two wild cats fighting over a piece of meat, each tried to kill his adversary. Taking up diverse postures, describing innumerable evolutions, running like an ox's urine, halting, coming and going, they executed a myriad different movements; stepping sideways, making feints, twisting to avoid a blow, turning about, darting to the attack, each hurling himself on his opponent, standing firm and erect, disengaging themselves, presenting back and flank, preparing to leap, letting go or stealing away, thus Sugriva and Ravana, to their utmost satisfaction, multiplied such feats in which they excelled.
Meanwhile the titan had recourse to magic and when the King of the Monkeys perceived it, he flew into the sky triumphant, shaking off all fatigue whilst Ravana, overcome with exhaustion, breathing heavily, baffled by the King of the Monkeys, stood confounded.
Thus the Lord of the Monkeys, acquiring fame as a warrior, having wearied Ravana in combat, ascended into the infinite blue with the swiftness of thought, and that offspring of the Sun, having accomplished this feat, delighted, rejoined the army, honoured by the monkey leaders, thereby increasing the joy of the foremost of the Raghus.