Seeing him bearing the marks of valour, the elder brother of Lakshmana, Rama, embracing him, said to Sugriva:—
"Without consulting me you have acted thus imprudently; such rashness is not seemly in a king. By your recklessness you have caused me great anxiety as also the army and Bibishana! O Warrior, you are enamoured of deeds of daring! Do not act thus in the future, O Vanquisher of your Foes! If you had come by some misfortune, what would Sita or Bharata or my younger brothers, Lakshmana or Shatrughna have availed me?
"O Valiant Scourge of Your Foes, if you had not returned, though I am conversant with your valour, this was my fixed resolve; having destroyed Ravana in fight with his sons, forces and chariots, I should have installed Bibishana as King of Lanka, suffered Bharata to ascend the throne and renounced my life, O Great Prince."
At these words of Rama, Sugriva answered, saying:—
"Seeing the one who had borne away your consort, O Brave Descendant of Raghu, conscious of mine own strength, how could I have acted otherwise?"
Thus spoke that warrior, and Raghava, having commended him, addressed Lakshmana who was endowed with auspicious marks, saying:—
"Beside these cool waters and trees laden with fruit, let us divide and marshal our forces, O Lakshmana! I foresee a terrible calamity boding universal destruction and death to the intrepid bears, monkeys and titans. Harsh winds blow, the earth trembles and the mountains quake; trees crash to the earth, sinister clouds resembling birds of prey roar in terrifying wise and let fall rain mixed with blood; the dusk, red as sandal, is full of horror and from the sun, a flaming circle falls. Wild beasts and birds emit frantic cries and are ill at ease; their voices and fierce aspect deprive them of their beauty. In the night, the moon, shorn of its radiance, surrounded by black and fiery rays, burns red, as at the time of the destruction of the world. A thin, dark, sinister rim of coppery hue is seen round the sun and on its surface a black mark appears nor does that orb approach any other planets as is usual, all of which prefigures the final dissolution of the world.
"Behold, O Lakshmana, how crows, eagles and vultures are flying low, circulating rapidly, emitting piercing and lugubrious cries! The earth changed to mud and gore will be covered with rocks, javelins and darts hurled by the monkeys and titans I This very day, surrounded by the monkeys on all sides, let us make an attack on that citadel defended by Ravana."
Having spoken thus to Lakshmana, his younger brother, that mighty warrior rapidly descended from the summit of the mountain and coming to the bottom of that hill, the virtuous Raghava inspected his army which was invincible to the foe. Then, the time having come, Rama, who was conversant with the fitting moment to act, gave the signal to advance and, at an auspicious moment, bow in hand, turned towards Lanka.
Bibishana, Sugriva, Hanuman, Nala, Jambavan the King of the Bears, as also Nila and Lakshmana followed, and behind them the mighty host of bears and monkeys, covering a vast stretch of earth, threw themselves in Raghava's wake. Hundreds of rocks and enormous trees served as weapons to those monkeys, verily the vanquishers of their foes, who resembled elephants.
Soon the two brothers, Rama and Lakshmana, those subduers of the foe, reached the city of Ravana, garlanded with banners, enchanting with the pleasure gardens which adorned it, inaccessible with its many gateways, high walls and arches. Then those denizens of the forests, encouraged by the sound of Rama's voice and obedient to his commands, halted before Lanka, which was impregnable, even to the Gods.
Thereafter Rama, accompanied by his younger brother, bow in hand, surveyed the northern gate, which was as high as the peak of a mountain and took up his position there. That valiant son of Dasaratha, followed by Lakshmana, advanced under the walls of Lanka, whose highway was Ravana. None but Rama could have approached and examined the northern gate where Ravana stood, which was formidable and guarded by him as the ocean by Varuna and which was defended on all sides by titans, as the Danavas, who sow terror in the hearts of the weak, guard Patala. And Rama observed innumerable weapons and armour of every kind heaped there for the combatants.
Meanwhile Nila took up his position with Mainda and Dvivida at the eastern gate at the head of a host of monkeys.
Angada with his vast forces, assisted by Rishabha, Gavaksha, Gaja and Gavaya, occupied the southern gate. Hanuman, that virtuous monkey, was stationed at the western gate with Prajangha, Tarasa and other warriors grouped round him, whilst Sugriva, personally occupied an observation post in the centre. At the head of all those leading monkeys, the equals of Suparna and Pavana, thirty-six kotis of renowned warriors were grouped round Sugriva.
Meanwhile, under Rama's command, Lakshmana, assisted by Bibishana, distributed his innumerable divisions at each gate. Behind Rama, Sushena and Jambavan, those lions among the monkeys, possessing the teeth of tigers, furnished with trees and rocks, waited delightedly for the signal to fight. Lashing their tails feverishly, they used their jaws and nails as weapons; trembling in every limb, their faces were set grimly and they were extremely strong, some having the strength of ten elephants, some ten times more powerful, some equalling a thousand elephants in might and there were some who had the vigour of a million elephants and even more, for the might of those monkey leaders was immeasurable! Marvellous and astonishing was the gathering of those monkey forces resembling a doud of locusts! The earth and the air were filled with monkeys rushing towards Lanka or already stationed beneath its walls. By hundreds and hundreds of thousands, bears and monkeys poured towards the gates of Lanka that others assailed on every side. The hills disappeared completely under that
host of Plavamgamasj numbering millions, who were ranging round the city and those heroic monkeys, with tree trunks in their hands, surrounded the whole of Lanka that even the winds were unable to penetrate.
Then the titans, who in their valour rivalled Shakra, seeing themselves besieged by those monkeys like massed clouds, were struck with a sudden terror, and, as they broke rank, a tremendous clamour arose from that host of combatants which resembled the roar of the ocean beating against the shore! At this tumult, the whole of Lanka with its ramparts, arches, hills, woods and forests, began to tremble.
Under the direction of Rama, Lakshmana and Sugriva, that army became even more invincible than the hosts of the Gods and titans. Raghava, however, having ranged his forces in order to wipe out the demons, took counsel with his ministers and pondered deeply again and again. Desiring to act without delay and with circumspection, he, in his consummate experience with Bibishana's approbation, calling to mind the duty of kings, summoned Bali's son, Angada and said to him,"Go My Friend on my behalf and, passing through the City of Lanka without fear, say to Dashagriva,'You have sacrificed your renown, destroyed your kingdom and, in thine haste to die, hast lost your wits! Rishis, Devas, Gandharvas, Apsaras, Nagas, Yakshas and kings, O Ranger of the Night, have been oppressed by you in your reckless pride. O Titan, from now on, that arrogance, begot of the boon you didst receive from Svyambhu, shall be subdued! I shall inflict a fitting penalty for your ruthless abduction of my consort; it is with the Rod of Chastisement, that I have stationed myself at Lanka's gates. Having displayed your martial valour, slain by me you shalt attain the region of the Gods 1 Do you demonstrate the same courage that you didst employ in bearing Sita away from me, having first deceived me by magic arts. O Most Vile of Titans, I shall rid the earth of titans with my pointed shafts, if you dost not make an appeal to my clemency by returning Maithili to me.
"'That virtuous prince of the titans, the illustrious Bibishana, who is here, will undoubtedly reign in Lanka without opposition. Nay, it is not fitting that, even for an instant, the crown should belong to one as perfidious as you are, a wicked creature who surroundest thyself with fools and who is not conversant with the Self!
"'Enter into combat with me, O Titan, exert your strength and valour in the fight, mine arrows will chasten you and you will be subdued! Even should you range the Three Worlds in the form of a bird, O Night-ranger, my glance would follow you and you wouldst not return alive. I give you this salutory counsel—prepare for thine obsequies, let Lanka regain her splendour, your life is in my hands!'"
Furnished with Rama's instructions, the son of Tara ascended into the air, like unto the God bearing away a sacrificial offering, and in an instant arrived at Ravana's palace where he beheld him seated at ease amidst his ministers.
That youthful Prince of the Monkeys, Angada of golden bracelets, like a flaming torch descended close to the king and having made himself known, addressed the whole of Rama's exceedingly significant speech, without adding or subtracting anything, to him in the presence of his court, saying,"I am the messenger of the King of Koshala, Rama of imperishable exploits. I am the son of Bali, Angada is my name; perchance you have heard of me?
The descendant of Raghu, Rama, the increaser of Kaushalya's delight, speaks thus to you,"'Come forth and enter into combat with me! Manifest your valour! I shall destroy you, your counsellors, your sons, relatives and allies. You being dead, the Three Worlds will cease to be troubled, O You whose enemies are the Devas, Danavas, Yakshas, Gandharvas, Uragas and Rakshasas; you thorn in the side of the ascetics! Bibishana will become king when you are slain by me, if you dost not return Vaidehi, having paid her every homage, and cast thyself at my feet!'"
Hearing these harsh words from that lion among the monkeys, the Lord of the Titans, infuriated, issued the following command repeatedly to his attendants, saying,"Seize him and put him to death!"
On this order being given by Ravana, Angada, who in his splendour resembled a blazing torch, was seized by four terrible titans and the son of Tara suffered himself to be made captive, without offering any resistance, for that valiant warrior desired to display his prowess to the host of Yatudhanas. Thereafter, seizing three of the titans, like unto serpents in his arms, he leapt on to the palace that resembled a mountain. Shaken by his impetuous bound the three titans fell to the ground under the eyes of their king. Then the powerful son of Bali scaled the palace up to its roof, which equalled the summit of a mountain in height, and the impact of his bounds caused it to crumble before Dashagriva's gaze as a peak in the Himalayas is shattered by lightning.
Having destroyed the roof of the palace, Angada proclaimed his name and with a triumphant roar rose into the air. To the exceeding terror of the titans and the great delight of the apes, he alighted in the midst of the monkeys beside Rama.
Thereupon Ravana, transported with anger, giving himself up for lost began to sigh heavily. Meanwhile Rama, who was surrounded by Plavamgamas emitting joyful cries, eager to destroy his adversary, advanced to meet him in combat.
Now Sushena was at the head of innumerable monkeys who were able to change their form at will and, under the order of Sugriva, he patrolled the gates and that invincible warrior resembled the moon moving amidst the stars.
Seeing the hundreds of divisions encamped under the walls of Lanka and marshalled on the shores of the sea, the titans were amazed whilst some were terror-struck and others, overjoyed at the prospect of fighting, leapt in exultation. Beholding those hosts occupying the whole space between the walls and the moat, however, and seeing the monkeys like unto a second rampart, those rangers of the night, cast down, cried out,"Woe I Alas!" in their terror.
In the midst of that appalling tumult, the soldiers of Ravana seized hold of their powerful weapons and advanced like the winds that blow at the dissolution of the worlds.