Meanwhile those inhabitants of the woods, surveying the earth and the sky, beheld the brothers, Rama and Lakshmana, covered with arrows and the titan resting, like unto Indra having loosed the rains. Accompanied by Sugriva, Bibishana, lamenting, came to that place in haste, and Nila, Dvivida, Mainda, Sushena, Kumuda, Angada and Hanuman approached, weeping for the sons of Raghu.
Breathing but faintly, bathed in blood, riddled with innumerable darts, motionless, they lay stretched on a bed of arrows sighing like serpents, washed in blood, resembling two golden standards, and those warriors, lying on a hero's couch, were surrounded by monkey leaders whose eyes were suffused with tears.
Beholding the two Raghavas pierced with darts, a profound emotion stirred those monkeys, who were accompanied by Bibishana, and they surveyed the four quarters without being able to discover Ravani, who had veiled himself in his magic during the fight. But while he was hidden by his occult power, Bibishana, also having recourse to magic arts, looking round, beheld his nephew of incomparable exploits, who was invincible in battle, standing nearby. Although that warrior, who had no peer in the field, had made himself invisible by virtue of the boon he had received, he was recognized by Bibishana, who was full of energy, glory and prowess.
Indrajita, however, contemplating his own feat, gazed on those two warriors stretched on the earth and, in an excess of joy, wishing to share it with all the titans, said,"Those two mighty brothers, Rama and Lakshmana, the shyers of Khara and Dushana, are now struck down by my darts I Even were they aided by the Gods and Asuras with the hosts of Rishis, they would never be able to release themselves from those arrows that paralyse them! I have overcome Rama for the sake of my sire, who is a prey to anxiety and fear, passing the three watches of the night without allowing his limbs to rest on his couch. I have subdued that wretch, who destroys all beings to their very root, on account of whom the whole of Lanka is agitated like a river in the rainy season. As clouds are dispersed in the autumn, so have the exploits of Rama and Lakshmana and all the inhabitants of the woods been rendered void."
Having spoken thus to all the titans, who had witnessed the scene, Ravani began to assail all the monkey leaders. First he struck down Nila with nine exceedingly powerful javelins, thereafter he wounded Mainda and Dvivida with three more and that mighty bowman, having pierced Jambavan in the breast with an arrow, loosed ten shafts on the impetuous Hanuman. Then Ravani, in the fight, full of ire, with twin arrows pierced Gavaksha and Sharabha, those two of immeasurable prowess, and the leader of the Golangulas and the son of Bali, Angada, were overcome by innumerable darts by the swift-coursing Ravani. Transfixing the leading monkeys with shafts resembling tongues of fire, that mighty and colossal son of Ravana began to shout in triumph and, having overwhelmed and routed the monkeys with a hail of weapons, that long-armed hero burst into loud laughter, exclaiming,"Behold, O Titans, with a formidable net I have bound those two brothers in the presence of their forces!"
Thus did he speak and all those titans, versed in magic, were exceedingly delighted by his exploit and cheered him unanimously with a roar like unto thunder, crying,"Rama is dead!" and hearing these tidings and beholding the two brothers, Rama and Lakshmana, lying on the earth without breath or movement, they all paid homage to Ravana's son, reflecting "They are slain!" In a transport of joy, Indrajita, victorious in conflict, returned to Lanka spreading happiness among the Nairritas.
A great fear however had taken possession of Sugriva, who was overcome with terror on beholding Rama and Lakshmana riddled with arrows and pierced in every limb and bone, whereupon Bibishana said to the King of the Monkeys, who was afflicted, his face bathed in tears, his eyes wild with terror,"Have no fear, O Sugriva, stay this rain of tears; these are the fortunes of war; the titan's victory is not assured; fate may still smile upon us, O Warrior. These two heroes, full of prowess will recover from their swoon. Take courage and inspire me with courage also, who am bereft of a protector, O Monkey! Death cannot strike terror in those who find their felicity in truth and justice."
Thus speaking, Bibishana, dipping his hand in water, washed Sugriva's beautiful eyes and, after taking water and uttering a sacred formula, the virtuous Bibishana then dried the face of that intelligent King of the Monkeys and addressing him in words full of good sense and comfort, said,"This is not the moment, O Greatest of Monkey Kings, to manifest agitation, excessive emotion in such a situation leads to death, therefore abandon this faint-heartedness that will prove thine undoing and consider how you canst best serve the troops. Keep watch over Rama so long as he has not regained consciousness, for when they come to themselves, the two Kakutsthas will remove all fear from us. This is nothing to Rama nor is he dying, and Lakshmi, who is inaccessible to those who are doomed, has not abandoned him. Therefore pluck up your courage and call on your prowess while I seek to inspire the ranks with renewed confidence. Those monkeys, their eyes dilated, trembling and discouraged by the rumours whispered from ear to ear, on seeing me cheerfully going about amongst the ranks of the army, will abandon their fears like a discarded garland, O King of the Monkeys!"
Having reassured Sugriva, that Indra among the Titans, Bibishana, passed through the monkey lines reviving their confidence.
Meanwhile Indrajita, that great magician, surrounded by all his forces re-entered the City of Lanka and sought out his sire. Approaching Ravana. with joined palms, he imparted the pleasant tidings to him, saying,"Rama and Lakshmana are slain!" Then Ravana joyfully springing up in the midst of the titans, on hearing that his two enemies had succumbed, smelt the head of his son and in great delight questioned him concerning the matter.
Being interrogated by his sire regarding what had taken place, Indrajita related how the two brothers, bound by his shafts, were lying without strength or movement. On hearing those tidings from that warrior of the great car, joy flooded Ravana's inmost being and Dashagriva, banishing his fears regarding the son of Dasaratha, warmly felicitated his offspring who stood beside him.