The son of Ravana having returned to Lanka, his purpose accomplished, the leading monkeys surrounded Raghava in order to watch over him, and Hanuman, Angada, Nila, Sushena, Kumuda, Nala, Gaja, Gavaksha, Panasa, Sanuprastha and the mighty Jambavan with Sunda, Rambha, Shatabali and Prithu, having re-organized their ranks, alert, armed with trees surveyed the quarters of the sky up and down and on every side and, even if a grass stirred, they exclaimed "It is a titan!"
Ravana, meanwhile, full of joy dismissed his son Indrajita and thereafter summoned the female titans who guarded Sita and they with Trijata, having hastened there at his command, were addressed by that monarch in his delight who said to them
"Inform Vaidehi that Indrajita has slain Rama and Lakshmana! Compel her to enter the Pushpaka Plane and show them to her lying on the field of battle 1 Her consort, the One depending on whom rendered her so proud that she refused to be united with me, lies there struck down with his brother in the presence of his army! From now on, free from anxiety, grief and expectation of re-union, Maithili, adorned in all her jewels, will submit herself to me. To-day, beholding Rama with Lakshmana fallen under the sway of death on the battlefield, seeing no other haven and hoping for nought else, the large-eyed Sita will voluntarily seek refuge with me!"
At these words of that wicked monarch, they all replied—"Be it so!" and went to where the Pushpaka Chariot was, thereafter ascending it. Taking that aerial car, the female titans, in obedience to Ravana's behests, rejoined Maithili in the Ashoka Grove.
There they found her overcome with the grief that separation from her lord caused her, nevertheless they placed her in the Chariot Pushpaka and when they were seated therein with Trijata, Ravana took her round the city garlanded with flags and banners and at the same time the delighted Monarch of the Titans caused a proclamation to be made in Lanka announcing that Rama as also Lakshmana had been slain by Indrajita in combat.
Sita, transported with Trijata in that car, beheld the monkey troops who had been slain and witnessed the joy exhibited by those eaters of flesh and the monkeys afflicted with grief standing round Rama and Lakshmana. And she beheld those two warriors also, lying pierced with arrows, unconscious, riddled with weapons, their armour shattered, their bows broken, transfixed by darts. Those two brothers, who were filled with valour, the foremost of heroes were lying stretched on the earth resembling two youthful sons of Pavaka.
And when the unfortunate Maithili beheld those two intrepid lions among men, pierced with spears, she broke into piteous lamentations, and the dark-eyed Sita, the daughter of Janaka, of faultless limbs, beholding her lord and Lakshmana lying on the earth, burst into sobs. Exhausted with weeping and grief on seeing those two brothers resembling the offspring of the Gods and, believing them to be dead, overwhelmed with affliction, she spoke thus.