Bound by those formidable weapons, the two sons of Dasaratha, breathing like serpents, lay bleeding on the earth.
Those foremost of monkeys, the valiant companions of Sugriva, plunged in grief, were all standing round the two illustrious warriors.
Then the mighty Raghava, by virtue of his hardihood and native strength, awoke from his swoon despite the shafts that held him captive. Beholding his brother bleeding, unconscious, tightly bound and his features changed, Rama, full of grief, lamented thus,"Of what use to me is the recovery of Sita or even life itself, since my brother, now lying before mine eyes, has been struck down in the fight? It were possible for me to find a consort equal to Sita in this world of mortals but not a brother, friend and comrade in arms such as Lakshmana! If he has returned to the five elements, he, the increaser of Sumitra's joy, I will yield up my life breaths in the presence of the monkeys!
"What shall I say to my mother, Kaushalya, or to Kaikeyi? If I return without Lakshmana, how shall I console Sumitra trembling and crying out like an osprey, who sighs for her son's return from whom she has been separated so long? What answer shall I give to Shatrughna and the illustrious Bharata when I return without the one who followed me to the forest? Nay, I should not be able to endure Sumitra's reproaches; I will leave my body here; I am unable to continue living. Woe unto me and to my lack of nobility, since, through my fault, Lakshmana has fallen and lies on a bed of arrows as one who has yielded up his life!
"O Lakshmana, you didst ever console me in my great misfortune; now that you are slain, you will no longer be able to allay my sufferings by your words. You, who, in this battle, struck down innumerable titans, art fallen, pierced by darts, like a hero on the selfsame field. Lying on a bed of arrows, bathed in blood, you are nought but a heap of weapons! It appears as if the sun has set behind the Astachala Mountains! Pierced with spears, your limbs express thine agony without the aid of words. I shall follow that illustrious warrior to the region of Yama, as he accompanied me when I retired to the forest; he, who ever loved his own and was filled with devotion for me, lies in the state to which my misdeeds have brought him, wretch that I am!
"Even when deeply provoked, that valiant hero never uttered an unpleasant or harsh word; he who was able to loose five hundred arrows in one shot and who excelled Kartavirya himself in the science of archery; Lakshmana, who was accustomed to a rich couch and who, with his arrows could sever those of the mighty Shakra, is lying slain on the earth.
"Those vain words, which I uttered, will undoubtedly consume me since I have not enthroned Bibishana as King of the Titans! Return at once, O Sugriva, since bereft of my support you and your leaders will be overcome by Ravana. Recross the sea accompanied by thine army led by Angada with Nila and Nala, O King. I am fully satisfied by the great military exploit of Hanuman, impossible to any other and by that accomplished by the King of the Bears and the General of the Golangulas. That which Angada, Mainda and Dvivida did, the terrible combat that Kesarin and Sampati sustained, the formidable struggle in which Gavaya, Gavaksha, Sharabha, Gaja and other monkeys, who are willing to sacrifice their lives for me, took part, are sufficient for me. Nay, it is not possible for mortals to avoid their destiny. O Sugriva, fearing to fail in your duty, you have done all that a friend and comrade could do; all that is due to friendship, you have accomplished, O Foremost of Monkeys! I take leave of you all; go where it seems best to you!"
Hearing Rama lament thus, the monkeys allowed tears to fall from their reddened eyes, when, at that moment, Bibishana, having established order in the ranks, mace in hand hurried to rejoin Raghava. Seeing him, who resembled a mass of collyrium, hastening towards them thus, the monkeys thinking him to be Ravani, fled away.