Meanwhile the illustrious and powerful King of the Monkeys enquired saying:—"What does this stampede signify? The army resembles a ship amidst the waves struck by a tempest!"
Hearing Sugriva's speech, Angada, the son of Bali, answered: "Dost you not see Rama and Lakshmana of the Great Car, those two valiant and illustrious sons of Dasaratha, covered with darts lying all bloody on a bed of arrows?"
Thereupon that Indra among monkeys, Sugriva, said to his son:—"To my mind there is some other cause why the monkeys, bewildered, their eyes distended with terror, are throwing down their arms in order to flee in all directions without shame and without looking behind them, jostling each other and leaping over those who have fallen!"
In the midst of this turmoil, the warrior Bibishana came there, a great mace in his hand and said "Victory to Rama! Victory to Rama!" and Sugriva observed that it was this titan who had caused the panic among the monkeys whereat he addressed the illustrious King of the Bears, who stood near, and said:—
"It is Bibishana who has come hither! On seeing him the monkeys, seized with terror, have fled, deeming him to be Ravana's son; do you rally those fugitives immediately, who, in fear, have scattered in all directions and inform them that it is Bibishana who has come!"
In obedience to Sugriva's command, Jambavan perceiving it to be Bibishana and recognizing his voice, re-assured the monkeys and arrested the stampede, whereupon freed from anxiety they all retraced their steps.
Meanwhile the faithful Bibishana, on beholding Rama's body as also Lakshmana's covered with arrows, was overcome with distress in his turn. Dipping his hand in water, he washed their eyes, but, anguish seizing his heart, he began to weep and lament, saying:—
"Behold to what a pass these two powerful and valiant warriors have been brought by that titan with his crafty ways! The son of my brother, that wicked youth of perverse soul, in his demoniacal cunning, has deceived those two honourable fighters. Pierced by arrows, covered with blood, they are lying on the earth like two porcupines. Those two gallant beings, those two lions among men, on whom depended the position to which I aspired, to my destruction are lying here insensible. I am as one dead and, deprived of the hope of becoming king am lost, whilst my rival Ravana sees his vow fulfilled and his desires realised!"
Thus did Bibishana lament, whereupon Sugriva embraced him and that magnanimous King of the Monkeys spoke to him in this wise:—
"O Virtuous Prince, you shalt certainly reign over Lanka; Ravana and his son will not achieve their purpose; the injury done to Rama and Lakshmana is not grave, they will both emerge from their swoon and destroy Ravana and his hordes in battle."
When he had thus consoled and comforted the titan, Sugriva issued his commands to Sushena, his stepfather, who stood before him, saying:—
"Take these two brothers, Rama and Lakshmana with the foremost of the monkey divisions to Kishkindha, till these two scourgers of their foes have recovered consciousness. As for me, I shall slay Ravana with his son and his relatives and bring back Maithili as did Shakra the prosperity he had lost."
Thus did that King of the Monkeys speak and Sushena answered him saying,"Formerly a great war took place between the Devas and Asuras and, by making themselves invisible again and again, the Danavas overcame the Gods despite their skill in bearing arms. Experienced warriors though they were, wounded, unconscious and almost deprived of life, yet Brihaspati revived them by the aid of remedies accompanied by the recitation of sacred formulas.
"Let the monkeys, Sampati, Panasa and others go in haste to gather those simples by the ocean of milk; undoubtedly those monkeys are conversant with the two mountain herbs, the celestial Samjivakarana and Vishalya, which were created by a God. From the bosom of the milky ocean rise the Mountains Candra and Drona, where the divine ‘Amrita' emerged after the churning, it is there that these miraculous herbs are to be found. Let the Son of the Wind, Hanuman go to those two mountains placed in that vast sea by the Gods."
As he was speaking, a great wind arose accompanied by massed clouds and lightning, whipping up the salty waves and causing the mountains to tremble as from an earthquake. Under the mighty stroke of Vata's wing the great trees fell headlong into the briny waters of the sea, their branches broken, whilst terror seized the great snakes who inhabited these regions and those monsters plunged into the depths.
Suddenly Garuda, the valiant son of Vinata like unto a blazing torch appeared to all those monkeys and, on beholding him, the serpents who bound those two warriors in the form of mighty arrows, fled away. Thereafter Supama, touching the two Kakutsthas and offering them his good wishes, with his hands wiped their faces that shone like the moon.
Under Vainateya's touch, the wounds of both were closed and their bodies immediately assumed a brilliant and glowing hue. Their valour, vigour, strength, endurance and resolution, those great qualities, also perspicacity, intelligence and memory were redoubled.
Having raised up those equals of Vasava, the exceedingly valiant Garuda embraced them warmly and Rama said to him,"Thanks to your beneficence and grace we have both been delivered from the strange evil that Ravana brought upon us and our strength has returned. As in the presence of my father Dasaratha, or my grandfather Aja, in your presence also my heart is filled with felicity. Who art you endowed with a beauty which distinguishes you, you bearing crowns, divine perfumes and celestial ornaments, the raiment which clothes you being free from dust?"
Then the extremely illustrious Vainateya, who was full of valour and the Lord of Winged Creatures, his heart enraptured, addressed Rama, whose eyes sparkled with delight, and said,"I am your dear friend, O Kakutstha, your very breath, Garuda, who have come hither to assist you both. The mighty Asuras and exceedingly energetic monkeys as also the Gandharvas with Shatakratu at their head or the Gods themselves would not have been able to sever these formidable bonds wrought with arrows, woven with the aid of great magic by Indrajita of ruthless deeds. These offspring of Kadru of sharp fangs and subtle poison, which the potent arts of the titan had changed to arrows, had fettered you. Fortunate art you, O Virtuous Rama, you true hero, as also Lakshmana, your brother, the destroyer of his foes in combat.
Hearing of your plight, summoning up mine energy in affection for you both, giving ear to the call of friendship alone, I came hither with all speed. Now that you are liberated from these formidable bonds let both of you be constantly on your guard! All titans by nature have recourse to treachery in war, whilst for you, O Chivalrous Warriors, honour is your only weapon. Never trust the titans on the battlefield for such perfidious means are ever employed by them."
Having counselled him in this wise, the mighty Supama embraced Rama tenderly and craved his permission to depart, saying,"Dear and Virtuous Raghava, you are a friend to your foes, allow me to take my leave. Do not enquire indiscreetly into the cause of my friendship, O Raghava, who am as near to you as your breath, though external to you. You sbalt know of it when you have achieved success in battle, O Hero! When, under the rain of your missiles, Lanka has been destroyed save for the aged and the children and you have slain Ravana, thine adversary, you shalt bring back Sita!"
Having said this, Suparna of swift flight, who had just healed Rama's wounds in the presence of the monkeys, having paid obeisance to him and taken him into his arms, mounted into the sky with the speed of the wind.
Seeing the two Raghavas healed of their wounds, the leaders of the monkeys, lashing their tails, roared like lions. Thereafter gongs were beaten and drums resounded, whilst conches were blown amidst general rejoicing. Some manifested their strength by breaking down the trees which they used as maces and, in their warlike frenzy, those Plavamgamas hurled themselves on the gates of Lanka.
Thereafter a terrible and appalling clamour arose amongst the foremost of monkeys as, at the end of summer, the roaring of thunderclouds in the night.