That formidable clamour, set up by the monkeys who were full of martial ardour, arrested the attention of Ravana and his titans, and he, hearing the joyful and spirited acclamations and the distant tumult, said to his ministers who surrounded him,"A great uproar, resembling the muttering of clouds, has arisen from that horde of delighted monkeys. Undoubtedly their joy is great, their mighty shouts are agitating the ocean itself. Nevertheless whetted shafts have rendered the two brothers, Rama and Lakshmana, insensible, therefore this tremendous outcry almost alarms me!"
Having spoken thus to his ministers, the Lord of the Titans said to his Nairritas, who stood round him
"Do you speedily discover from what cause this general rejoicing among those forest dwellers proceeds in their present painful situation!"
At this command, the titans hastily climbed the ramparts from where they beheld the army and its leader the illustrious Sugriva with the two Raghavas also, freed of their bonds, seated in noble ease, whereupon the titans were thunderstruck. With terror in their hearts, those fierce warriors jumped down from the walls and, deadly pale, returned to their king. With downcast mien, those titans, skilled in speech, faithfully informed Ravana of those unpleasant tidings, saying,"The two brothers, Rama and Lakshmana, whom Indrajita had bound with his benumbing shafts and whose arms he had pinioned, are freed from the arrows which paralysed them and now appear on the field of battle in their native vigour, resembling two elephants who have snapped their fetters."
At these words, the powerful King of the Titans, full of anxiety and highly incensed, grew pale and said,"If mine adversaries, having thus been bound, are now free despite those formidable arrows, those rare boons resembling serpents bright as the sun, that were infallible and with which Indrajita secured them after overcoming them in combat, then mine entire authority is in jeopardy! Verily those darts, bright as fire, which in battle deprived mine enemies of life have been rendered void."
Having uttered these words in furious tones, hissing like a snake, he addressed one named Dhumraksha who was seated amidst the titans and said,"Taking with you a considerable force of titans go without delay and slay Rama and Lakshmana."
At the command of that crafty monarch, Dhumraksha circumambulated him and immediately left the palace, thereafter having crossed the threshold he said to the General of the Forces:
"Mobilize the army, what need is there for delay when the battle is joined!"
Thus spoke Dhumraksha and the General gathered together a large number of troops in accord with Ravana's command.
Thereafter those prowlers of the night, who were valiant and of a formidable aspect, with girdles of bells round their waists, shouted exultantly and ranged themselves round Dhumraksha.
Furnished with every kind of weapon, brandishing spears, hammers, maces, harpoons, sticks, iron cudgels, bars, hooks, picks, nooses and axes, those terrible titans sallied forth with the noise of thunder. Clad in mail and mounted on chariots that were magnificently dressed with flags and decorated with bands of pure gold, harnessed to mules of many heads or steeds of exceeding fleetness or elephants maddened with Mada juice, some of those titans bounded forward like veritable tigers.
And Dhumraksha, with a great clatter set out in a celestial car to which mules with golden harness and the heads of deer and lions were hitched; and that valiant general surrounded by the titans set forth amidst mocking laughter through the western gate, where Hanuman was stationed. As he advanced in his excellent car harnessed to mules, whose voices he emulated, birds of ill-omen planed above him and on the top of his chariot a terrible vulture alighted while those devourers of corpses clustered on the point of his standard. Streaming with blood a huge decapitated and livid trunk fell to earth emitting inarticulate cries at Dhumraksha's approach and the sky rained down blood, the earth shook, the wind blew adversely with the roar of thunder and darkness obscured every quarter.
Beholding those terrible portents that appeared in all their horror, boding ill-fortune to the titans, Dhumraksha was filled with alarm, and terror seized all the soldiers who accompanied him. At the moment when, full of fear, amidst his countless titans, eager to enter into combat, that valiant general set out, he beheld the vast army of the monkeys resembling a great flood, protected by the arms of the Raghavas.