Hearing of Akampana's death, the irascible Lord of the Titans with a downcast mien, took counsel with his ministers and, having reflected awhile and deliberated with them, Ravana, the Lord of the Titans, passed the forenoon in inspecting the defences; and the King passed through that city, decorated with banners and flags, guarded by the titans and filled with innumerable troops.
Seeing Lanka beseiged, Ravana, the Sovereign of the Titans, said to the devoted Prahasta, a skilled soldier,"This city thus beleaguered and hard pressed, O Skilful Warrior, may only be delivered by myself, Kumbhakama, you, who art in command of the army, Indrajita or Nikumbha; none else could undertake such a task!
"Taking a company of warriors, do you speedily place thyself in their midst and set forth in order to triumph over those inhabitants of the woods. In this sortie, as soon as the army of monkeys hear the uproar created by the titans, they will disperse. Volatile, undisciplined and fickle, the monkeys will not be able to endure your cry, any more than an elephant can endure the roaring of a lion. His army routed, Rama with Saumitri, robbed of further authority, will fall into your power, O Prahasta.
"A hypothetical misfortune is preferable to one that is certain! Whether it be unpleasing to hear or no, say what you considerest to be to our advantage!"
Thus addressed by that Indra among Titans, Prahasta, the leader of the army, answered him as Ushanas the King of the Asuras, saying,"O King, formerly we discussed this matter with the wise and, after examining the different points of view, a disagreement arose between us.To return Sita was what I considered the most advantageous course, not to do so, meant war; we forsaw this.
"I have ever been heaped with gifts and honours by you as also with every mark of friendship. When the opportunity arises, is it not for me to render you a service? Nay, I shall neither spare life, children, wife nor wealth! Know me to be ready to sacrifice my life in thine interest in battle!"
Having spoken thus to his brother, the General Prahasta said to his leading officers who stood before him,"Gather a large army together immediately; to-day the flesh-eating birds and beasts shall feed on the enemy that I strike down on the battlefield with my swift arrows!"
At this command those highly powerful leaders assembled the forces in the abode of the King of the Titans. In an instant, Lanka was filled with redoubtable warriors like unto elephants, furnished with weapons of every kind.
While they propitiated the God who feeds on offerings and paid homage to rite brahmins, a fragrant breeze, bearing the scent of clarified butter, began to blow and the titans, all ready for battle, taking hold of garlands of every kind, adorned themselves with delight. Thereafter, armed with bows and mail, they set out in their chariots at a brisk pace, their eyes turned towards their King, Ravana. And they ranged themselves round Prahasta whilst he paid obeisance to his Sovereign to the beating of a gong of dreadful sound, whereafter, with his weapons, that general ascended his chariot that was furnished with all that was needful, harnessed to exceedingly swift steeds, skilfully driven and in perfect condition.
Rumbling like a great cloud, shining like the moon itself, unapproachable as the serpent that served as its standard, solidly and artistically constructed, decorated with a net of pure gold, smiling as it were in its magnificence, such was the car in which Prahasta, having received Ravana's command, stood.
Then the titan set out from Lanka immediately in the midst of a powerful army and, at his departure, a rolling of drums, resembling the roar of Par janya, and a blast of fanfares arose that seemed to fill the earth and, with the blare of conches, the titans advanced, creating a terrible uproar.
Narantaka, Kumbhahanu, Mahanada and Samunata, colossal giants, his adjutants, surrounded Prahasta who emerged from the eastern gate in the midst of an immense, formidable and powerful army resembling a herd of elephants and, in the centre of that force, vast as the sea, Prahasta in his fury appeared like Death at the end of the world, whilst the uproar, that arose on his setting forth with his titans raising their war cries, drew a sinister answering call from all creatures.
In a cloudless sky, birds of prey advancing to meet the chariot, circled from left to right; fearful jackals vomited forth fire and flames, howling lugubriously; a meteor fell from heaven and the wind blew chill; planets, in opposition to each other, lost their brilliance whilst clouds with a raucous sound showered blood on Prahasta's car with which his attendants were bespattered; a croaking vulture, facing the south, alighted on the top of his standard depriving that titan of his lustre. His charioteer, who never turned back in battle, despite his skill, again and again allowed the goad to fall from his hand. The brilliance of that sortie of incomparable pomp vanished in an instant and the horses stumbled on the even ground.
Beholding Prahasta, renowned for his martial valour, advancing to give battle, the army of monkeys, furnished with weapons of every kind, went forward to meet him and a formidable clamour arose amongst them as they tore up the trees and seized hold of great rocks.
Thereafter the titans yelled and the monkeys roared, both armies being filled with ardour and, in their fury and zeal and their impatience to slay each other, they challenged one another with tremendous shouts.
Meanwhile Prahasta advanced on the forces of the monkeys whom in his folly he imagined he would destroy and, with an impetuous bound, he hurled himself upon that army as a grasshopper falls into a flame.