Their General having succumbed in the fight against the foremost of the monkeys, the heavily armed forces of the King of the Titans took to flight with the speed of the tide.
Coming before their lord, they apprised him of the death of their leader who had fallen under the blows of the Fire-god's offspring, and at these tidings, the king was transported with anger. Learning that Prahasta had perished in the fight, his heart was filled with grief and he addressed the foremost of his leaders, as Indra those who never grow old1 and said,"That foe is not to be despised, under whose blows the destroyer of Indra's host, the leader of my army with his followers and elephants, fell. I myself shall enter this strange battlefield without hesitation in order to obtain victory and destroy the enemy. As a forest is consumed by fire, so shall I to-day with a myriad arrows burn up the simian army with Rama and Lakshmana."
Speaking thus, that enemy of the Lord of the Celestials ascended his chariot which shone like a flame and was yoked to a team of horses, its brilliance increased by the splendour of his person.
The sound of trumpets, gongs, drums and leonine roars accompanied by the clapping of hands, acclamations and hymns of praise, frenziedly greeted the departure of the Sovereign of the Titans. Those eaters of flesh, resembling mountains or clouds, whose glances flashed like torches, surrounded the supreme Leader of the Titans as he marched out, like unto the Bhutas escorting Rudra, the Lord of the Immortals. Issuing from the city, that monarch observed the army of ferocious monkeys with trees and rocks in their hands, ready for combat, roaring like a vast ocean or a mass of thunder clouds.
Seeing the demon divisions seething with fury, the incomparably illustrious Rama, whose arms resembled great serpents, accompanied by his forces, said to Bibishana,"Who is in command of this army furnished with every kind of standard, banner and canopy, armed with javelins, swords, stakes and other weapons and missiles, that is indomitable and composed of intrepid soldiers and elephants as high as the Mahendra Mountain?"
Thus interrogated, Bibishana, the equal of Shakra in valour, pointed out the principal leaders of those courageous lions among the titans to him and said,"That hero of coppery hue mounted on the back of an elephant, causing its head to sway, the rival of the rising sun, know, O Prince, to be Akampana.
"He who, standing in his chariot, brandishes his bow which resembles Shakra's, whose standard bears the image of a lion and who is like unto an elephant with its long curved tusks, is Indrajita, who is renowned for the boons he has received from Brahma.
"That archer yonder, like unto the Vindhya, Asta or Mahendra Mountains, standing in his car, a mighty warrior, who wields a bow of unequalled size, is called Atikaya on account of his immense stature.
"The tawny-eyed warrior resembling the dawn, riding a wild elephant with its bells jangling, who is shouting aloud, is Mahodara.
"The rider of the brilliantly caparisoned steed he, who is armed with a gleaming javelin and resembles a mass of evening clouds, whose fury rivals the lightning and possesses the velocity of a well-directed thunder-bolt, who is seated on the foremost of bulls and shines like the moon, is Trishiras. The other, resembling a thunder-cloud, of large and well-developed chest, who is twanging his bow and has the King of the Snakes as his standard, is Kumbha.
"The one who carries a mace decorated with gold and diamonds from which flames and smoke issue, who advances as a standard bearer to the titan army, is Nikumbha of prodigious exploits.
"That warrior in a chariot adorned with flags, gleaming like a glowing brazier, who is furnished with bows, swords and arrows, is Narantaka, who, in combat, fights with mountain peaks.
"Finally the one who appears surrounded by spectres of dreadful form with heads of tigers, buffalo, mighty elephants, deer and horses, riding under a white canopy with a slender handle, his diadem resembling the moon, he who is the humbler of the Gods themselves, like unto Rudra amidst the Bhutas is the mighty Lord of the Titans himself. His countenance is graced by swinging earrings, his formidable stature equals the Vindhya, that Lord of Mountains, he who brought Mahendra and Vaivasvat low, is the King of the Titans, equal to the sun in splendour."
Then Rama, the subduer of his foes answered Bibishana and said,"Ah! What glory, what exceeding majesty is Ravana's, the Lord of the Titans! As one cannot gaze on the sun, neither can the eye rest on him, such is the blinding strength of his magnificence! Neither Devas, Danavas nor heroes possess a body equal to his! Who can rival the brilliance of the King of the Titans? All are as high as hills, all have crags as their weapons, all are furnished with fiery darts. The Lord of the Titans stands out among those ardent warriors as Antaka amidst the impetuous Bhutas of strange form. It is to his destruction that that wretch comes to-day within my sight 1 To-day I shall slake my wrath born of Sita's abduction!"
At these words, the valiant Rama who was accompanied by Lakshmana, took up his bow and, standing erect, placed an arrow, the most powerful of all, upon it.
Meanwhile the haughty Monarch of the Titans said to his brave troops•
"Take up your positions unfalteringly at the gates and principal exits, the outposts and fortifications. Learning of my presence amongst you, these savages will try and profit by this opportunity to take this heretofore impregnable city by surprise, it being now denuded of its defenders, and they will then immediately put it to the sword with their united forces."
Thereafter Ravana dismissed his escort and the titans left on his orders, whereupon he plunged into the sea of monkeys, agitating it as a great fish the waters of the ocean.
As soon as that Indra of the Titans with his bow and burnished arrows had thrown himself into the fray, the leader of the monkeys rushed out to meet him, tearing up a great mountain peak. Seizing that rock covered with innumerable trees, he hurled it at that prowler of the night, who, seeing it flying towards him, broke it in pieces with his golden-stemmed arrows. That huge and high peak covered with trees being shattered, fell on the earth, and the Lord of the Titans, like unto another Antaka, selected a dart resembling a great serpent. Taking up that arrow, which rivalled Anila in velocity and possessed the brilliance of fire and the force of lightning, he loosed it with fury on Sugriva in order to slay him, and that weapon, equal to Shakra's thunderbolt, loosed by Ravana's arm, penetrated Sugriva's breast in its flight as formerly Guha's spear when he discharged it at the Krauncha Mountain.
Wounded by that missile which bereft him of consciousness, that warrior fell moaning to the earth. Beholding him stretched on the ground deprived of his senses, the Yatudhanas raised a shout of triumph.
Thereupon Gavaksha, Gavaya, Sushena as well as Rishabha, Jyotirmukha and Nala, of exceeding corpulence, tearing up rocks, hurled themselves on the King of the Titans. Then that Lord of the Titans, with hundreds of arrows possessed of sharp points, rendered their projectiles fruitless and pierced those leaders of the monkeys with a hail of marvellous golden-shafted arrows.
Under the blows with which the Enemy of the Gods assailed them, those generals of terrifying stature were overcome, whereupon he covered that formidable army of monkeys with a shower of arrows.
Assailed and wounded, those warriors emitted cries of terror and pain, and those deer of the branches, whom Ravana was destroying with his darts, fled for refuge to the intrepid Rama, whereupon that mighty and skilful archer, Raghava, seizing a weapon, set out at once. Lakshmana however, approaching him with joined palms, addressed him in moving tones, and said,"Truly, O Noble Brother, I am able to slay this wretch! It is I who will destroy him, do you give me leave, O Lord!"
Then the exceedingly powerful Rama, a true hero, answered him saying,"Go, O Lakshmana, and in this duel may your valour prevail! Without doubt Ravana is endowed with great strength, he is a warrior of outstanding prowess; the Three Worlds themselves could not withstand his fury; seek out his weak points and guard against thine own; be ever vigilant and defend thyself with eye and bow!"
Thus spoke Raghava and Saumitri embraced him, thereafter offering obeisance to him and bidding him farewell, he entered the lists. There he beheld Ravana with arms as large as the trunks of elephants, who was brandishing his dread and fiery bow, covering the monkeys, whose limbs he had severed with a close rain of darts.
Beholding this, the exceedingly energetic Hanuman, born of Maruta, in order to bring that rain of arrows to an end, rushed on Ravana and, approaching his chariot, lifted his right arm and threatened him; thereafter the sagacious Hanuman addressed him, saying,"You have obtained the boon of invulnerability to Devas, Danavas, Gandharvas, Yakshas and also Rakshasas but the monkeys are a danger to you! This five-branched hand of mine, which I now raise, will rob you of the life that has long been resident in your body!"
At these words of Hanuman, the exceedingly valiant Ravana, his eyes inflamed with anger, answered,"Strike swiftly without fear! Win eternal renown, having measured your strength with mine, I shall destroy you I"
Then the son of the Wind answered Ravana who spoke thus, saying,"Recollect that I have slain your son Aksha already I"
At this, the powerful Lord of the Titans struck the son of Anila a violent blow with the palm of his hand and the monkey reeled; thereafter the mighty and illustrious Hanuman recovered his balance and, steadying himself, struck that enemy of the Immortals in fury. Under the violent impact of the monkey's blow, Dashagriva shook like a mountain when the earth trembles.
Seeing Ravana struck in the fight, Rishis, Siddhas and monkeys raised a great shout, as also the Devas, Suras and Asuras.
Then the extremely spirited Ravana, having regained his breath, said,"Well done! Well done! O Monkey, you are an adversary worthy of praise!"
Thus did he speak, and Maruti answered him, saying, "Cursed be that strength since you dost still survive, O Ravana! Now come, enter into a decisive struggle with me, O Perverse Wretch! Why this boasting? My fist is about to despatch you to the abode of Yama 1"
Hearing Hanuman's words, the powerful Ravana, enraged, his eyes red with fury, whirling his fist with force brought it down violently on the monkey's chest and, under the shock, Hanuman reeled once more, whilst the King of the Titans, Dashagriva, that exceedingly fiery warrior, seeing his valiant opponent bereft of strength, turned his chariot towards Nila. With his arrows, like unto great serpents, he pierced the vital parts of his enemy overwhelming the Monkey General, but Nila, the leader of the monkey army, assailed by that hail of weapons, with one hand flung a great rock at the King of the Titans.
Meanwhile Hanuman, burning with courage, having recovered his senses, in his martial ire cried out furiously,"O Ravana, King of the Titans, who art engaged in combat with Nila, to attack one already fighting with another is unjust I"
The titan, however, shattered the crag, hurled by Nila, with seven pointed darts so that it fell in pieces and, seeing the rock riven asunder, the leader of the monkey army, Nila, destroyer of hostile forces, who resembled the Fire of Time, glowed with fury and began to hurl Asvakarna, Sala, Cuta and other flowering trees of varying fragrance in the fight, whereupon Ravana caught them in his arms and snapped them, showering a formidable rain of shafts, as from a cloud, on Pavaki but that colossus, assuming a diminutive form, leapt on to the point of Ravana's standard.
Beholding the offspring of Pavaki thus installed on the point of his standard, the King blazed with fury, whilst Nila let forth a shout, and sometimes the monkey leapt on to the apex of the banner and sometimes on to the end of the bow and sometimes on to the peak of the diadem, so that Lakshmana, Hanuman and Rama also, were astonished.
The intrepid titan too was amazed at the monkey's agility and took up a marvellous and flaming arrow but the Plavam-gamas shouted joyously at Nila's tactics, being amused to see Ravana disconcerted by his leaping about in combat and the shouts of the monkeys infuriated Dashagriva, who, in his confusion, did not know how to act.
Taking up an arrow charged with sacred formulas, that prowler of the night aimed at Nila, who had climbed to the tip of his standard and, at that instant, the King of the Titans, said,"O Monkey, thine agility proceeds from a rare power of magic; do you save thyself if you canst by these innumerable tricks with which you are familiar and constantly employest! This mantra-propelled weapon of mine, that I am about to loose, will sever the existence you seeks to retain!"
Speaking thus, the long-armed Ravana, Lord of the Titans, having placed Agni's shaft on his bow, struck Nila, the General of the monkey army, with that weapon and he, pierced through the breast by that shaft charged with sacred mantras, was suddenly overcome and fell to the earth, yet by virtue of his sire's powerful aid and his own native vigour, though brought to his knees he was not deprived of life.
Beholding the monkey unconscious, Dashagriva, insatiable in combat, in his chariot, whose rattling resounded like thunderclouds, rushed on Lakshmana and coming to the centre of the field, halted, standing there in his glory.
Thereafter the majestic Lord of the Titans lifted up his bow, whereupon Saumitri, of indomitable courage, said to him as he prepared to loose his powerful shaft,"O King of the Night-rangers, now enter into combat with me; cease from fighting with the monkeys!"
Hearing that marvellously modulated voice that resounded like the twanging of a bow-string, the King, drawing near to his adversary, who stood close to his chariot, answered in anger,"O Son of Raghu, it is my good fortune that brings you within my range to-day, you who, in your folly, advancest to meet your death! This very instant you shalt descend to the region of Mrityu under a rain of missiles loosed by me."
Then Saumitri, unmoved, spoke to that boastful titan of sharp and protruding teeth, saying,"O King, stout hearts eschew bragging! O Greatest of Evil Doers, you are sounding thine own praises! I am well acquainted with your strength, prowess, vigour and audacity, O King of the Titans! Approach! Here I stand with bow and arrows in my hand; of what use are vain boasts?"
Thus accosted, the Lord of the Titans, infuriated, let fly seven marvellously plumed arrows which Lakshmana shattered with his golden-shafted darts. Observing his shafts resembling great serpents, whose coils had been crushed in an instant, the Lord of Lanka was transported with anger and let fly further sharp arrows. The younger brother of Rama, however, caused a well-aimed rain of missiles from his bow to fall on Ravana, but he, with the aid of weapons in the forms of knives, crescents and long-eared arrowheads, severed them, without allowing them to disturb him.
Seeing that the succession of his shafts proved useless, the King of those hostile to the Gods, astonished at Lakshmana's skill, let fly more whetted shafts upon him anew and, from his side, Lakshmana, the equal of Mahendra, placing some sharpened darts on his bow that were formidable,swift as lightning and of blazing effulgence, loosed them on the Titan King in order to strike him down, whereupon Ravana shattered those pointed darts and struck his rival in the forehead with a shaft as bright as the Fire of Time, which had been bestowed on him by Svyambhu. Then Lakshmana, struck by that missile, reded a little, scarcely able to retain his bow but coming to himself with difficulty, he shattered that weapon belonging to Indra's foe. Having broken his bow, the son of Dasaratha struck him with three pointed darts and the king, pierced by those arrows, swooned, regaining his senses with difficulty. Wounded by those shafts, his bow wholly demolished, his limbs spattered with flesh and streaming with blood, the Enemy of the Gods, himself of formidable energy, seized a spear which had been given him in war by Svyambhu. That smoking lance, as bright as fire, the terror of the monkeys in the fray, the powerful guardian of the titan empire, was hurled on Saumitri the younger brother of Bharata, who received that spear falling upon him with arrows and darts, as if it were a sacrificial fire; nevertheless that weapon entered his broad chest.
The powerful Raghu, struck by that spear, lay on the earth, breathing fire and the King of the Titans rushing on him suddenly, while he was yet insensible, seized him brutally in his two hands, yet though he was able to lift up Himavat, Mandara, Meru and the Three Worlds with the Gods, he could not raise the younger brother of Bharata, for Lakshmana, though wounded in the breast by Brahma's weapon, recollected that he was of the substance of Vishnu Himself, and that thorn in the side of the Gods, though overcoming Saumitri, was unable to bear him away.
At that instant, the son of Vayu, enraged, threw himself in anger on Ravana like a flash of lightning and struck him with his fist on the chest. Under that blow, the Lord of the Titans was brought to his knees and stumbling, fell. From his ten mouths, eyes and ears, blood streamed in torrents and, rolling unconscious, he slid under the body of the chariot; there he remained deprived of his senses, stupified, not knowing where he was. Beholding Ravana, despite his redoubtable strength swoon on the battlefield, Rishis and monkeys began to shout in triumph as did also the Gods and Asuras, whilst the courageous Hanuman lifting up Lakshmana in his arms, who had been wounded by his adversary, returned to Raghava. In his friendship and extreme devotion to him, the son of Vayu found Lakshmana, whom foes were unable to move, as light as a feather. Thereafter the spear, that had overcome Saumitri, returned to the titan's chariot.
Meanwhile Ravana who was full of energy in combat, having recovered consciousness, selected some steel-pointed arrows and armed himself with an enormous bow.
On his side, healed and freed from that lance, Lakshmana recollected that he was part of Vishnu, and Rama, seeing the innumerable army of powerful monkeys overthrown on the battlefield, rushed on Ravana, but Hanuman, following him, said,"Climb on my shoulders in order to overcome the titan!"
Hearing those words from the son of Vayu, Raghava climbed on the shoulders of that great monkey, as Vishnu on Garuda, in order to fight with the Enemy of the Gods.
Standing in his chariot, Ravana appeared before that Lord of Men and, seeing him, that mighty hero rushed upon him, like unto Vishnu with his mace upraised rushing furiously on Virocana. Thereupon Rama drew the cord of his bow and, like unto the roll of thunder, said in a deep voice to the Lord of the Titans,"Stay! Stay! You have evoked my displeasure! Where, O Tiger among the Titans, will you flee to escape me? Even if you seeks refuge in the region of Indra or Vaivasvata or Bhaskara or Svyambhu, Vaishnavara, Shankara or in the ten regions, even in those abodes you shalt not elude me from now on. The one who, struck by the spear, fell swooning this day only to recover consciousness immediately, shall now, assuming the form of death, claim you, your sons, and grandsons in battle. O King of the Titan People, here is he under whose blows, fourteen thousand titans of terrible form perished, who had established themselves in Janasthana and were furnished with excellent weapons."
Hearing Raghava speak thus, the exceedingly powerful Lord of the Titans full of rage, hurled himself on the son of Vayu, who was bearing Rama with extreme velocity through the fray and, recollecting his former hostility, he smote him with flaming arrows resembling the tongues of the Fire of Dissolution. Struck by that titan as also pierced by his darts, the native strength of which Hanuman was possessed increased still further. Nevertheless the extremely illustrious Rama, seeing the wound that Ravana had just inflicted on that lion among the Plavagas, was transported with anger and, approaching his chariot with his slender and pointed shafts, shattered it with its wheels, horses, banner, canopy, great standard, charioteer, darts, spears and swords; thereafter, with great force, he hurled a weapon like unto a thunderbolt falling on Mount Meru so that that valiant monarch, whom neither thunder nor lightning could cause to tremble, stumbled, letting fall his bow at the violent impact of Rama's missile, which created a deep wound.
Seeing him swooning, the magnanimous Rama took up a flaming arrow shaped like a crescent moon and used it to shatter the crown of the supreme Lord of the Titans, which was as bright as the sun.
Then Rama said to that Indra of the Titans, whose splendour was dimmed, the setting of his diadem riven, and who resembled a venomous snake robbed of its poison, or the sun, its rays extinguished, bereft of lustre,"You have accomplished a great feat and my brave soldiers have succumbed beneath your blows; now you are weary; in this condition I shall not put you under Mrityu's power with my shafts. Leave the fray and return to Lanka; I grant you this reprieve, O King of the Rangers of the Night! Having regained your breath, return in your chariot with your bow and, standing on your car, you shaft once more bear testimony to my prowess!"
At these words, his joy and boasting subdued, his bow shattered, his horses and charioteer slain, pierced with arrows, his great diadem broken, the king instantly returned to Lanka.
After the departure of that powerful Indra of Night Rangers, Lakshmana drew out the arrows from the monkeys, which they had received while fighting in the forefront of that vast battlefield, and the adversary of the King of the Gods being vanquished, all the Celestials, Asuras and creatures of the ocean and other regions with the great serpents, as also all beings on earth and in the waters, rejoiced.