Returning to the City of Lanka, afflicted with the fear of Rama's arrows, his pride humbled, the king's mind was troubled. Like an elephant by a lion or a snake by Garuda, that monarch had been overcome by the great-souled Rama, and the Lord of the Titans was maddened by the mere recollection of Rama's shafts possessed of the splendour of lightning, resembling the Rod of Brahma.
Seated on his magnificent and elevated throne made of gold, he let his gaze wander over the titans and said,"Since I, the equal of the mighty Indra, have been defeated by a mere man, all the rigorous asceticism I have practised has been in vain. I asked to be rendered invulnerable to Devas, Danavas, Gandharvas, Yakshas, Rakshasas and Pannagas, but of man I made no mention.
Rama, the son of Dasaratha is the one, I deem, of whom Anaranya, born of the race of Ikshvaku spoke, saying,"'O Lord of the Titans, in my House will be born a naan who will slay you in battle with your sons, ministers, army and charioteer, O Vilest of Your Race, O Perverse Wretch!'
"I was further cursed by Vedavati for a former outrage and perchance she has been born as the high-souled daughter of Janaka and what was predicted by Uma, Nandishvara, Rambha and Punjikasthala, the daughter of Varuna, has come to pass! The words of the sages never prove false, it is on account of all this therefore that you should exert yourselves to the uttermost.
"Let the titans go to the summit of the Charyapura Mountain and awaken Kumbhakarna on whom the curse of Brahma rests, he who is without equal in prowess and who humbles the pride of the Gods and Danavas themselves."
Prahasta being slain and the king himself defeated in the fight, that monarch issued his commands to the dreadful host, saying,"Guard the gates and man the ramparts, rouse Kumbhakarna who is slumbering soundly. He is sleeping peacefully oblivious of all that is passing, his senses overcome by lust, and he remains unconscious for periods of two or three or nine days and sometimes for six, seven or eight months. Having met in consultation with me nine days ago, he has since fallen asleep. In combat, that warrior is the rampart of all the titans; he will soon strike down all the monkeys and those two sons of a king. He is the very banner of the titans in battle but that insensate one, intent on vulgar pleasures, still slumbers. Though overcome by Rama in this terrible struggle, my fears will be dissipated when Kumbhakarna wakes; of what use is this rival of Indra to me, if, in so pressing a danger, he is not ready to assist me?"
Hearing their sovereign's words, the titans ran in great haste to Kumbhakarna's abode. At Ravana's command, those eaters of flesh and drinkers of blood took perfumes, garlands and a great store of food and left immediately. They entered that cave with its gates measuring a league in extent, the wonderful refuge of Kumbhakarna, from which issued the fragrance of flowers. And with his breathing, Kumbhakarna pressed those titans back despite their strength who, with difficulty, had penetrated into the cave.
When they had entered into that ravishing underground dwelling paved with precious stones and gold, those lions among the Nairritas beheld that redoubtable giant lying there, and that monster, wrapt in profound slumber, resembled a crumbling mountain and together they sought to waken him.
His limbs covered with down which stood on end, Kumbhakarna, he of irresistible valour, was breathing like a serpent, and, as he slept, he emitted dreadful snores, his nostrils being horrible and his mouth a gaping hell. Stretched to his full length on the earth, he gave forth an odour of marrow and blood; his limbs were adorned with golden armlets and he wore a diadem as bright as the sun; thus did that lion among the Nairritas, Kumbhakarna, the slayer of his foes, appear!
Then those powerful titans, in order to satisfy him, placed a heap of venison as high as Mount Meru before him and piled up a great mass of viands, antelope, buffalo and bear and a prodigious mound of victuals, leathern bottles of blood and meats of every kind before Kumbhakama, the Enemy of the Gods. Thereafter they rubbed that scourge of his foes with the most rare sandalwood and covered him with celestial garlands, and sweet smelling perfumes, and they burnt incense and hymned the praises of that warrior who proved fatal to his foes.
The voices of the Yatudhanas burst forth on every side like thunder and with full cheeks they blew impatiently on their conches as bright as the moon, causing a terrible uproar, and those rangers of the night clapped their hands and shook Kumbhakama, creating a great clamour, in order to awaken him, so that the birds passing through the air fell down at the sound of the conches, drums, gongs, clapping of hands and leonine roars.
As the illustrious Kumbhakama did not waken from his slumber despite the great uproar, all those troops of titans seized hold of bars, pestles, maces, rocks, clubs, hammers, and with these and blows from their fists, those titans beat the chest of Kumbhakama violently as he was sleeping peacefully on the ground. And Kumbhakama's breathing prevented those titans from standing upright so that they had to seat themselves round him and, with all their strength, which was considerable, they began to beat drums, cymbals and gongs and to blow their myriad conches and trampets. Ten thousand demons surrounded that colossus who resembled a heap of antimony, and tried in every way to rouse him by their blows and cries; nevertheless he did not wake.
As they were unable to rouse him by these means, they had resort to more energetic and ruthless methods, causing horses, camels and elephants, whom they beat with sticks, whips and thongs, to trample upon him, while gongs, conches and trumpets blared forth as they crushed his limbs under piles of heavy logs. The noise of the hammers and pestles they wielded with all their strength and the shouts they raised filled the whole of Lanka with its hills and woods but still he did not wake.
Then they beat a thousand drums simultaneously with sticks of refined gold but yet he did not stir from his profound slumber, being under the spell of the divine curse.
Finally those powerful rangers of the night, growing enraged, redoubled their efforts in order to rouse the titan and some beat drums, some shouted, some tore out his hair and others bit his ears, pouring hundreds of pitchers of water into them, but Kumbhakarna, plunged in deep sleep, did not stir. Some armed with daggers struck that mighty titan on the head, chest and limbs but that monster did not wake, though smitten by Shataghnis fastened with ropes, and at last a thousand titans ran up and down his body, till Kumbhakarna, becoming aware of that pressure, he who had remained insensible to the violent blows of crags and trees, under the prompting of extreme hunger suddenly emerged from sleep, yawning, and with one bound, stood up. Waving his two arms resembling serpent's coils or the peaks of mountains, hard as cut diamonds, that ranger of the night opened his monstrous mouth, like unto Vadavamukha and yawned horribly, and when he yawned, his mouth resembled hell and glittered like the sun rising over the high peak of Mt. Meru.
That extremely powerful ranger of the night, being awake, yawned, heaving a sigh like unto a tempest that shatters a mountain; and Kumbhakarna, rising up, resembling Time at the dissolution of the world, prepared to devour all beings and his two great eyes, like glowing braziers, glittering like lightning, resembled two huge flaming planets.
Then they pointed to those victuals of every kind, boar and buffalo and the giant devoured them. Thereafter that enemy of Shakra's satisfied his hunger with flesh and his thirst with blood, and he swallowed pitchers full of fat and wine, whereupon he, having feasted, those rangers of the night approached him and, surrounding him, paid obeisance to him.
Raising his eyelids that were heavy with sleep, his gaze still veiled, he let his glance fall on the night rangers on every side and, in a voice of authority, that lion among the Nairritas, surprised at being roused, enquired of them, saying
"For what reason have you thus wakened me so suddenly? Is all well with the king or is he in some peril? In truth there must be some pressing and serious danger from an external source since you have come in haste to awaken me. I shall drive every misfortune away from the King of the Titans this very day even if I have to cut Mahendra himself to pieces or freeze Anala! Nay, it is certain that one does not interrupt the slumbers of one, such as I, for any trivial motive. Tell me frankly for what reason you have roused me, Kumbhakarna, the vanquisher of my foes?"
At these words, that were tinged with wrath, Yupaksha, the king's confidential minister, with joined palms, answered him saying,"It is not the Gods who threaten us in any way but a man who has placed us in this evil case, O Prince! It is not the Devas or Danavas who have put us in this peril; it comes to us from a mortal. Monkeys as large as hills are besieging Lanka! Furious on account of Sita's abduction, Rama is pressing us heavily. Recently a single monkey set fire to our great city and slew the youthful Prince Aksha with his escort of elephants. 'Get you hence!' were the words addressed by Rama to the King of the Titans in person, the offspring of Paulastya, that thorn in the side of the Gods, he who is equal to Aditya in splendour. That which this monarch never suffered at the hands of the Gods or Daityas or Danavas, he has had to endure from Rama, who spared his life."
Hearing from Yupaksha that his brother had been defeated in combat, Kumbhakarna, rolling his great eyes, said,"This very day, O Yupaksha, the whole army of monkeys with Lakshmana and Raghava will be destroyed by me on the field of battle after I have presented myself before Ravana. I shall gorge the titans on the blood of monkeys and, as for Rama and Lakshmana, I shall drink their blood myself I"
Hearing these bold words from that titan, whose anger increased his ferocity, Mahodara, the Leader of the Nairrita warriors, having offered him obeisance with joined palms, said to him,"When you have listened to Ravana and weighed the advantages and disadvantages of the matter, then, O Long-armed Warrior, set out immediately and destroy the foe on the battlefield."
Thus spoke Mahodara and Kumbhakarna, surrounded by titans, full of energy and prowess, prepared to depart. Thereupon the titans, having succeeded in rousing that prince of dreadful aspect and formidable valour, returned to the king's palace in all haste. Approaching Dashagriva who was seated on the throne, all those night-rangers with joined palms said to him,"Your brother, Kumbhakarna, has wakened, O King of the Titans, and now is it your will that he should enter the battlefield or dost you desire him to come hither?"
Thereupon Ravana answered those titans who stood before him and, with a glad heart, said,"I desire to see him here; let him receive the honours due to his rank!"
"Be it so!" answered all the titans and they returned to Kumbhakarna in order to apprise him of Ravana's command and said,"Do you go to the king, that lion of all the titans desires to see you; go and gratify your brother!"
Then Kumbhakarna, that indomitable and mighty warrior, hearing what was his brother's wish, cried,"So be it!" and leapt up from his couch. Washing his face and bathing, refreshed and delighted, he desired them to bring him to drink with speed, whereupon they brought him a soothing draught and those titans hastened to carry out Ravana's commands and presented him with wines and meats of every kind.
Having swallowed two thousand full pitchers, Kumbhakarna prepared to set out and, slightly inebriated and flushed, he was exhilarated and filled with energy. Impatiently, he marched away like Yama at the end of the World period, and approaching his brother's palace, he caused the earth to tremble with his tread. His body illumined the royal highway, like unto that orb of a thousand rays which gives light to the earth and, as he advanced, surrounded by a circle of titans paying him obeisance, he resembled Shatakratu approaching Svyambhu's abode.
Seeing that slayer of his foes on the royal highway, that monster as high as the peak of a mountain, the inhabitants of the woods, stationed outside (the city) as also their leaders, were seized with a sudden panic.
Some rushed to Rama for refuge, others fled away in fear, some, terrified, stampeded in all directions, others, paralysed with fright, lay on the ground.
Beholding that giant like a great peak, adorned with a diadem, who seemed to quench the sun with his brilliance, the inhabitants of the woods were seized with terror and, at the sight of that prodigy, fled in all directions.