Meanwhile the illustrious and valiant Rama, bow in hand, beheld that giant Kumbhakarna adorned with a diadem and, seeing that Indra among Titans with golden armlets, who resembled a mountain and was like unto a cloud charged with rain, or Narayana when formerly taking the three strides, the monkeys scattered once more.
In view of the stampede of his forces and that titan, who appeared to be increasing in size, Rama, astonished, enquired of Bibishana,"Who is this hero with a diadem and yellow eyes, resembling a mountain, who is to be seen in Lanka like unto a cloud riven by lightning or a great and strange meteor which has fallen to earth; he, at whose sight, the monkeys flee away on all sides? Tell me, who is this colossus? Is it a Rakshasa or an Asura? Never have I seen such a being!"
Thus questioned by Prince Rama of imperishable exploits, Bibishana, in his great wisdom, answered,"It is he by whom Vaivasvata and Vasava were defeated in battle; it is the illustrious Kumbhakarna, the son of Vaishravas! There is no titan equal to him in stature, he routed the Devas, Danavas, Yakshas, Bhujamgas, Pishitashanas, Gandharvas, Vidyadharas and Pannagas in their thousands, O Raghava! The Gods themselves are not able to slay Kumbhakama, who, spear in hand, is of monstrous aspect. 'It is the God of Death himself' they cry.
"The mighty Kumbhakarna is innately powerful, whilst the foremost of the titans owe their strength to the boons they have received. As soon as that monster was born and while yet an infant, urged on by hunger, he devoured thousands of beings. Seeing their kind consumed, those creatures, mad with fear, took refuge with Shakra and told him all that had taken place. Enraged, Mahendra struck Kumbhakarna with his mighty thunderbolt and, at the impact of Indra's weapon, that giant reeled howling with terror.
"When the cries of the titan were heard, the fear of those beings increased, and in his anger, the mighty Kumbhakarna tore out one of Airavata's tusks in order to pierce Vasava's breast and, under the blows of that monster, Indra appeared like a flame. Seeing this, the Devas, Brahmarishis and Danavas were thunderstruck and Shakra with those Celestials went to Svyambhu's abode and informed Prajapati of Kumbhakarna's wickedness; he also described to the inhabitants of the heavenly region, how he had devoured all those creatures, laid waste the hermitages and carried off others wives and said 'If he continues to devour those beings, in a short time the whole world will become a desert'.
"Hearing Vasava's words, the Grandsire of the Worlds summoned that titan, who appeared before him.
On beholding Kumbhakarna, Prajapati was troubled but, recovering himself, said to him,"'Assuredly Paulastya begot you to the destruction of the worlds! From to-day you shalt sleep like the dead!'
Struck by the Lord's curse that titan fell down before him.
"Meanwhile Ravana, exceedingly perturbed, said to Brahma,"'You have hewn down the golden tree which was about to bear fruit! It does not behove you to curse thine own grandson, O Prajapati; nevertheless your words may never prove vain; assuredly he must slumber but at least appoint a time for sleeping and a time for waking!'
"On Ravana's request, Svyambhu answered,'He shall sleep for six months and wake for a single day; for one day that warrior shall range the earth in order to appease his hunger, otherwise with his huge mouth he will consume the worlds like a great fire.'
"It is in fear of your prowess that the King Ravana, beset with peril, has now awakened Kumbhakarna, and that warrior of exceeding valour has emerged from his retreat transported with anger and is rushing upon the monkeys in order to devour them and appease his hunger. Seeing Kumbhakarna they have taken to flight; how can those monkeys withstand him in combat? Let them be told that he is merely a mechanical device created to frighten them; at these tidings they will take heart and remain here."
Hearing Bibishana's eloquent and persuasive speech, Raghava said to the General Nila,"Go, rally your forces and, having occupied the outposts of Lanka, the highways and bridges, let them strike camp, O Pavaki! See that the monkeys, furnished with rocks, trees and stones, arm themselves with these weapons."
At Rama's command, Nila, the leader in chief, a prince of monkeys, issued his orders to the army and thereafter armed with boulders, Gavaksha, Sharabha, Hanuman and Angada, like unto hills, advanced to the gates.
Having listened to Rama, the monkeys, those valiant apes, fell upon the enemy's army with shouts of triumph, battering it with trees and that ferocious company of monkeys, brandishing crags and trees, appeared as resplendent as a lowering mass of clouds spreading over a mountain.