Meanwhile that Lion among the Titans, resplendent in glory, still heavy with sleep, advanced with great strides along the royal highway; titans in their thousands surrounded that most invincible of warriors and, from the houses, a rain of flowers fell upon him as he passed.
Thereafter he beheld the vast and enchanting residence covered with gold of that Indra of the Titans which shone like the sun, resembling that orb when it enters a mass of clouds, and he penetrated into the palace belonging to the King of the Titans, observing him from afar on his throne, like unto Shakra approaching Svyambhu seated in state.
Coming to Ravana's abode with his escort of titans, Kumbhakama, pacing the earth, caused it to tremble. Having crossed the threshold of the palace, he passed through the courtyard and perceived his elder brother, who appeared troubled, seated in the Chariot Pushpaka. Full of anxiety, Dashagriva, beholding Kumbhakama, immediately rose up joyfully and motioned him to approach.
Then that mighty warrior, bowing to the feet of his brother, who was reclining on a couch, enquired of him,"What dost you desire of me?"
With renewed delight, Ravana rose and embraced him whereupon with brotherly salutations and traditional courtesies, Kumbhakama ascended the celestial and shining throne, and that giant being seated, his eyes red with anger, enquired of Ravana,"Why hast you forcibly torn me from my slumber, O King? Say from whence springs your fear and whom dost you wish me to slay this day?"
Then Ravana answered the enraged Kumbhakama seated beside him, who was rolling his inflamed eyes, and said,"You have slumbered for some time, O Warrior, and, in your profound oblivion, were indifferent to the peril in which Rama has plunged me. This glorious and mighty son of Dasaratha accompanied by Sugriva, having crossed the sea without hindrance, is destroying our race. Alas! See how by means of a bridge, these monkeys have made an ocean of the woods and groves of Lanka.
"The foremost of the titans have been slain by them in combat, nor do I see how these monkeys can be destroyed in battle by any means. Save us from this great peril, O Mighty Hero, and exterminate them to-day I It is on this account that you have been awakened; all my resources are exhausted I Help me to save the City of Lanka, in which the children and the aged alone remain. O Long-armed Warrior, for your brother's sake, accomplish this feat, impossible to another. I have never before spoken thus to any of my brothers, O Scourge of Your Foes! I have placed my supreme hopes and affections on you! O Bull among the Titans, how often, in the wars between Devas and Asuras, hast you overcome the Gods and Celestial Beings ranged against you! Call upon your valour, assuredly among all creatures none is equal to you in strength, O Redoubtable Hero! Render me this great service, O You, the lover of combat; do this for me, O You who art devoted to your friends 1 By your personal prowess scatter these hostile forces as the wind scatters the autumnal clouds."