Hearing this speech of the colossal and valiant Kumbhakarna, Mahodara replied,"Kumbhakarna, you are an offshoot of an illustrious race, you are courageous but you have two vulgar characteristics and, in your conceit, art unable to anticipate the course of events in all its aspects.
"It is not true that the king does not understand what is politic and impolitic, O Kumbhakarna, but you, in your youthful impetuosity, knowest only how to prate! The Lord of the Titans, who is conversant with the laws of time and place, is also aware of increase and loss as well as our situation and the state of the enemy.
"What man of sense would attempt that which an old thickheaded soldier with no respect even for his elders plumes himself on accomplishing? When you dost assert that duty, profit and pleasure are essentially opposed to each other, it is a proof that you are unaware of their real nature. Action is undoubtedly the source of all experiences and here below, happiness is the fruit we seek even in our most evil acts. Apart from pleasure, duty and profit yield felicity, but the fruit reaped from injustice and unrighteousness is calamitous. Men of strong character undertake those acts, the consequences of which they reap in another world, whilst those who give themselves up to the pursuit of pleasure reap the consequences here.
"Why should that which the king has so much at heart and which we approve, namely the chastising of his enemies, be set aside in any way? As for the motives you have given for marching against Rama single-handed, I will point out to you what is ill-considered and reprehensible about them! How canst you defeat Rama alone, he who formerly destroyed innumerable exceedingly powerfill titans in Janasthana? Those rangers of the night whom he overcame in Janasthana were valiant warriors also and dost you not behold them in the city, stricken with fear? By rousing Rama, the son of Dasaratha, who resembles a wounded lion, alas you are waking a sleeping serpent! Burning with valour and unapproachable in his fury, inaccessible as Mrityu, who would dare to challenge him? This entire army cannot face that foe without being imperilled, therefore it in no wise recommends itself to me that you should go out to meet him alone, O Child. Who, bereft of resources would be eager to meet with an adversary, ready to sacrifice his life and furnished with every pre-requisite! Rama has no equal among men, O Best of the Titans, how canst you plume thyself on entering into combat with him who is the rival of Indra and Vaivasvata?"
Having spoken thus to the enraged Kumbhakarna, Mahodara said to Ravana, the Destroyer of the Worlds, who was surrounded by the titans,"Having formerly borne Vaidehi away, why dost you delay? If you desirest Sita to submit to your will, I see a means of bringing her to your feet. If it pleases you, O Indra among the Titans, then hear me!
"Let it be proclaimed that I, Dvijihva, Samhradin, Kumbhakarna and Vitadama, all five, are going forth to slay Rama! We shall engage him in a fierce struggle and, if we triumph over thine enemy, we need resort to no other means, but, if your rival survive and we escape from the fight, then we will adopt the measures I have planned.
"We shall return from the battlefield and come hither covered with blood, our limbs pierced by darts on which are engraved Rama’s name, and relate how we have destroyed Raghava and Lakshmana! Thereafter we shall press your feet and you will cover us with honour, after which, mounted on an elephant you will publish the tidings throughout the city, relating how Rama, his brother and his army were entirely destroyed. Simulating an extreme satisfaction, O Subduer of Your Foes, you will promote feasting and rejoicing and bestow gold and slaves on your servants and distribute garlands, raiment and perfumes on your warriors, you thyself manifesting your delight by drinking. Thereupon a rumour will spread everywhere that Rama and his friends have been devoured by the titans; such will be the report!
"Then shalt you repair secretly to where Sita is, in order to offer her consolation and tempt her with grain, diamonds and entertainment in order to seduce her. By this deceit, O King, Sita’s grief will be increased and she, bereft of felicity, without a protector, will accede to your desire. Learning that her charming lord is slain, Sita, in despair and on account of womanly frailty, will submit to your will!
"Brought up in the lap of prosperity, this woman who is worthy of felicity and who is afflicted with misfortune, realising her happiness depends on you, will surrender herself wholly to you.
"This is the best course for you to follow. Even to behold Rama may prove disastrous; have no anxiety! Great happiness awaits you here without entering into combat! Neither losing your forces nor courting danger, triumph over thine enemy, O Monarch! Glory, felicity, prosperity and renown will long be the lot of your sovereign majesty!"