Replying to Mahodara's reproaches, Kumbhakarna said to his brother, Ravana, the King of the Titans,"Forsooth I shall dispel the immediate peril this day by slaying that wretch, Rama! Freed from thine adversary, be happy I Heroes do not thunder in vain like clouds bereft of rain! Do you mark how my threats find fulfilment in mine exploitsI Warriors do not need to boast, and accomplish the most difficult of feats without bluster! Cowardly monarchs, devoid of intelligence, who plume themselves on being wise, will ever find your speech acceptable, O Mahodara!

"All you effeminate creatures, agreeable talkers, who flatter the king, have always ruined any martial enterprise. Nothing is left in Lanka save its sovereign; its wealth is exhausted, its army destroyed and that monarch is beset by foes in the guise of friends! I shall go out and fight, determined to triumph over the foe and, in this wise, redeem your calamitous policy in this great struggle."

Hearing these words of the intelligent Kumbharkama, the King of the Titans answered laughing,"In sooth, Rama has terrorized Mahodara! Assuredly he does not relish battle, O Dear Friend! O Sagacious Warrior, I have none equal to you in devotion and prowess; go, slay mine adversary, O Kumbhakarna and speed towards victory!

"You wast sleeping and it was for mine enemy's destruction that I had you wakened; this hour is of extreme significance to the titans, O Vanquisher of your Foes! Go, arm thyself; let those two princes, the equals of Aditya in splendour, be your pasture! Beholding you, the monkeys will take to flight and the hearts of Rama and Lakshmana will cease to beat."

Having spoken thus to the exceedingly powerful Kumbhakarna, that illustrious lion of the titans felt he had received new life. Aware of Kumbhakarna's prowess and knowing his valour, the king expanded with joy like unto the immaculate moon.

Hearing his words, which filled him with delight, that warrior went away and, having listened to the king's speech, prepared for battle. Then that scourge of his foes vigorously brandished his iron spear decorated with fine gold that shone brightly and was as renowned as Indra's thunderbolt and equally heavy. The scourge of the Devas, Danavas, Gandharvas, Yakshas and Pannagas, wreathed in garlands, festooned with crimson flowers, emitting flames, that great spear, stained with the blood of his enemies, was taken up by the illustrious Kumbhakarna, who addressed Ravana, saying,"I shall set out alone; let your powerful army remain here! To-day in mine hunger and fury, I shall devour the monkeys!"

At these words of Kumbhakarna, Ravana answered,"Do you go out accompanied by troops furnished with picks and hammers; those monkeys are brave and exceedingly energetic! He who is rash enough to meet them alone will be torn to pieces by their teeth, yet, though they are extremely difficult to overcome, surround thyself with warriors and setting out, utterly destroy that enemy host so fatal to the titans!"

Thereafter, descending from the throne, the mighty Ravana placed a diadem, the interior of which was encrusted with pearls, on Kumbhakarna's brow and decked out that hero with bracelets, rings, precious gems and a necklace as bright as the moon, covering his limbs with celestial and fragrant garlands and setting earrings in his ears. With the bracelets, anklets and golden coins, with which he was adorned, the large-eyed Kumbhakarna shone like the sacrificial fire.

Resplendent with his great dark-blue girdle, he resembled the Mandara Mountain encircled by the snake at the time of the churning of the water of immortality. Clad in golden armour that no arrow could penetrate, which in its natural brilliance seemed to project flames, he was rendered as radiant as the King of the Mountains encircled by evening clouds. His entire body was covered with ornaments of every kind and, spear in hand, that titan called to mind Narayana, when, in his might, he took the three strides.

Thereafter that warrior embraced his brother and paid obeisance to him by circumambulating him in the traditional manner and, inclining his head to him, set out to the sound of conches and gongs.

Then Ravana, dismissing him with good wishes, caused an escort of well-equipped soldiers to accompany him with elephants, horses and chariots, emitting a sound like thunderclouds. Valiant fighters accompanied that prince of warriors mounted on serpents, buffalo, donkeys, lions, elephants antelopes and birds.

It was under a prodigious shower of blossom, a parasol over him, bearing a pointed spear in his hand, full of daring, that the enemy of Devas and Danavas, intoxicated with the smell of blood, set forth. And innumerable titans followed him on foot, full of energy and prowess, fierce of aspect, bearing weapons in their hands, their eyes red; and their ranks measured many leagues in extent and they resembled heaps of antimony and brandished maces, swords, sharp axes, javelins, bars, ramrods, hammers, great Sala Trees and were furnished with nets.

Meanwhile Kumbhakarna, assuming another terrible and ferocious form, advanced impetuously, measuring a hundred bows in breadth and six hundred in height, formidable, full of power and energy with eyes like unto chariot wheels. And, having assembled the titans, that colossus with his large mouth, who looked like a flaming crag said with a mocking laugh,"To-day the foremost of the monkey divisions will be consumed by me in my wrath one after the other like moths in a flame. Yet those inhabitants of the woods have never given offence and their race adorns the gardens of our dwellings.

"The cause of the city being beseiged is Raghava, and Lakshmana who accompanies him; he being slain, all will be slain; I shall therefore destroy him in fight."

At these words of Kumbhakarna, the titans emitted a great shout that seemed to agitate the ocean.

Then the crafty Kumbhakarna went forth and sinister portents appeared on every side; dark and fearful clouds accompanied by meteors were seen, and the earth, the sea and the forests trembled. Jackals of ferocious aspect, with flames darting from their mouths, began to howl and birds wheeled from left to right. A vulture alighted on the titan's spear as he advanced, and his left eye and arm twitched; a flaming meteor fell with a terrible crash; the sun lost its brilliance and no favourable wind blew.

Without heeding these threatening portents, causing the hair to stand on end, Kumbhakarna set out, urged on by the force of destiny. Having crossed the ramparts, that giant, equal to a mountain, beheld the vast army of the monkeys resembling a cloud and, seeing that most powerful of the titans, as high as a mountain, those monkeys fled in all directions, like clouds driven before the wind. At the sight of that tremendous host of monkeys scattering to the four quarters like a mass of cloud melting away, Kumbhakarna joyfully redoubled his shouts resembling thunder.

Hearing those terrible shouts, like unto the roar of clouds in the sky, countless Plavagas fell to the earth like great Sala Trees whose roots have been severed and, as Kumbhakarna hurled himself on the enemy with his huge mace in order to destroy him, he filled the ranks of the monkeys with extreme fear as does the Lord of Death accompanied by his minions at the end of the World Period.