Having leapt over the wall, Kumbhakarna, that giant, like unto the peak of a mountain, full of valour, set out from the city in haste and emitted a great shout which agitated the waters, drowned the thunder claps and appeared to shatter the mountains.
Seeing that warrior of fierce glance, as invincible as Maghavat, Yama or Varuna, the monkeys stampeded, and Prince Angada, beholding them fleeing, addressed the mighty Nala, Nila, Gavaksha and Kumuda, saying,"Forgetting your native valour and noble lineage, where are you fleeing in terror like common monkeys? Come back, O Companions, return! Is it thus that you defend your lives? Nay, this titan is not able to fight against you all; he is here to create panic amongst you. This great fear, that the titan inspires in you, will be dispelled by our prowess; return, O Plavamgamas!"
Rallied with difficulty from here and there and re-assured, those monkeys, armed with trees, halted in the field, and those dwellers in the woods stayed there ready to advance in fury on Kumbhakarna, like elephants intoxicated with Mada juice. Thereafter they attacked him valiantly with blows from mountain peaks, rocks and trees with their flowering crests but were unable to overthrow him. Innumerable stones, and trees with blossoming tops fell shattered on the earth, having come in contact with his limbs and that hero, enraged, on his side, struck down the ranks of those energetic monkeys by exercising his great strength, like unto a fire which suddenly blazes forth in the forest. Their limbs be-spattered with blood, those lions among the monkeys, overcome and cut down, lay there in great numbers resembling trees with coppery flowers. Thereafter, those monkeys bounded away without looking in which direction and some threw themselves into the sea and some leapt into the air. Overcome by that titan, who was disporting himself, some, despite their valour, fled over the sea by the way by which they had come and some, pale and distraught, escaped to the valleys. The bears climbed into the trees and some took refuge in the mountains; others being no longer able to stand, fell down and remained lying on the earth insensible as if asleep or dead.
Seeing the monkeys routed, Angada called out to them, "Stay! Let us fight! Return, O Plavamgamas! Were you to range the whole earth in your flight I see no refuge for you anywhere! Why do you seek to preserve your lives? If you fly, leaving your weapons, lest they impede your course, your wives will deride you for this cowardice, which is death to men of honour, O Warriors! Whither are you fleeing filled with fear like common monkeys, you who are born in rich and illustrious families? Where are those deeds of valour and prowess of which you boasted in the assembly? The reproach of cowardice will be heard by you; he, who seeks to save his life by fleeing, is despised! Follow the path chosen by men of courage and overcome your fears. If, after a brief existence, you lie stretched on the earth dead, you will attain Brahmaloka, inaccessible to cowards. We shall acquire glory by striking down the foe in fight and, if we succumb, we shall enjoy the treasures of heaven in the region of heroes, O Monkeys! Nay, Kumbhakarna will never return alive, having come before Kakutstha, as a moth that draws near to a glowing brazier. If one, despite our numbers, is able to disperse us and we preserve our lives by fleeing, then there is an end to our renown!"
Such was Angada's speech, he of the golden bracelets, and the fugitives replied to that hero's reproaches, saying,"That Titan Kumbhakarna, has caused a terrible carnage amongst us; it is not the moment to stay; life is dear to us!"
With these words the leaders of the monkeys, beholding that giant of fearful glance advancing, scattered in all directions.
Nevertheless Angada, by his exhortations and arguments, succeeded in rallying them and, re-assured by that sagacious son of Bali, they submitted to his commands and those foremost of monkeys returned to the field.