Seeing Kumbhakarna fall under the blows of the exceedingly courageous Raghava, the titans brought the tidings to their King, Ravana, and said,"O King, the rival of Kala is dead! Having overthrown the monkey ranks and devoured the Plavagas, he, for a space, displayed his prowess which has now been extinguished by Rama's unconquerable strength and half his body lies submerged in the vast ocean. Streaming with blood, his nose and ears severed, his head obstructing Lanka's gateway, he who resembled a mountain, Kumbhakarna, your brother, struck down by Kakutstha's arrow, is now but a naked and mutilated corpse, like unto a tree consumed by fire!"
Hearing this report of the mighty Kumbhakama's death on the battlefield, Ravana, overwhelmed with distress, swooned away.
Learning that their paternal uncle had been slain, Devantaka, Narantaka, Trishiras and Atikaya, a prey to grief, groaned aloud, and Mahodara and Mahaparshva, on hearing that their brother had perished under the blows of Rama of imperishable exploits, were seized with anguish.
Thereafter, regaining his senses with extreme difficulty, that lion among the titans, tormented by the death of Kumbhakarna, his senses troubled, began to lament, saying,"O Hero, O Humbler of the pride of your foes, O Mighty Kumbhakarna, urged on by destiny, you have left me for the abode of death! To go whither hast you deserted me without having extracted that thorn from my side or from the side of my kinsfolk? O You powerful warrior, destroyer of hostile ranks, from henceforth I no longer exist since I have lost my right arm, the support that delivered me from the fear of the Gods and Asuras. How has such a warrior, who quelled the pride of the Gods and Danavas, who resembled the Fire of Time, fallen to-day in the fight with Raghava? How has Rama been able, with a single arrow, to stretch you on the ground, you, whom the descent of the thunderbolt could not overwhelm? Seeing you succumb in combat, the Hosts of the Gods, standing in the heavens with the Rishis, emit shouts of joy. Assuredly this very day the Plavamgamas, making use of a favourable occasion, will scale the gates and fortifications of Lanka on every side, which heretofore were impregnable! I have no further need for a kingdom and what shall I do with Sita? Bereft of Kumbhakarna, I no longer wish to live. Since I am unable to kill Raghava, the slayer of my brother in combat, would it not be better to die, for life is empty to me? To-day I shall go where my brother has gone, nay, far from my brother I cannot live for an instant! Witnessing my plight, the Gods, who were formerly wronged by me, will certainly mock me! O Kumbhakama, now that you are dead, how shall I vanquish Indra? Bibishana's prudent speech, that great soul whom I disregarded in my blindness, has proved true; the cruel end of Kumbhakarna and Prahasta has justified his words! This is the disastrous consequence of that deed of mine, the banishment of the virtuous and fortunate Bibishana."
Such were the many burning lamentations to which the Ten-necked Ravana gave voice in the anguish of his soul on account of Kumbhakama, his younger brother, the enemy of Indra, and, knowing him to have perished in combat, he swooned away.