Hearing that Atikaya had been slain by the mighty Lakshmana, Ravana became extremely anxious and spoke as follows,"Dhumraksha, who is full of ardour and the most skilled in the use of arms, Akampana, Prahasta, and Kumbhakarna, those valiant titan warriors eager for combat, the destroyers of hostile forces, ever invincible, brave titans of immense stature who were versed in the use of every weapon, have fallen with their troops under the blows of Rama of imperishable exploits. Yet many powerful warriors were struck down by my son Indrajita, who is renowned for his strength and prowess; those two brothers were fettered by his formidable shafts bestowed on us as a boon. All the Gods and Asuras combined, despite their power, could not have broken those fearful bonds, nor the Yakshas, Gandharvas or Pannagas! I do not know by what force, magic or supernatural means, those bonds were severed by those two brothers, Rama and Lakshmana.
"Those courageous titans, who went out to fight at my command, have all perished in combat with the exceedingly valiant monkeys. Henceforth I do not see who, on the battlefield, will be able to slay Rama and Lakshmana or the powerful Sugriva and his forces.
"Ah! How mighty is Rama! How great is the range of his shafts! Those titans, who challenged this warrior, have all been destroyed! Now, on his account, let defences be set up everywhere, both in the city and round the Ashoka Grove where Sita is being guarded. Let the entries and exits be patrolled continuously by our sentinels, wherever they are posted 1 Establish yourselves with the foremost battalions everywhere in order to observe the movements of the monkeys, O Nightrangers! In the evening, at midnight or at dawn, no matter when, do not relax your vigilance in regard to the simian army. Observe what troops are placed in the line by the enemy, how they advance and where they halt; let the gateways and turrets be barricaded at once!"
All the titans listened to the commands of the mighty Lord of the Titans and went away to carry them out. Ravana, the King of the Titans, however, having issued these orders, exceedingly despondent, entered his abode, the fire of his anger smouldering within him, and that powerfill monarch of those rangers of the night, reflecting on the misfortune that had befallen his son, sighed without ceasing.