The titans, who had escaped the slaughter, hastened to apprise Ravana of the death of their leaders, Devantaka and others, as also Trishiras and Atikaya.
Hearing these mournful tidings, great tears immediately filled the king's eyes and for a long time he remained absorbed in the melancholy thought of the death of his sons and brothers.
Beholding the wretched monarch plunged in an ocean of grief, Indrajita the son of that Lord of the Titans, the foremost of warriors, addressed him thus,"O My Dear Father, since Indrajita still lives, do not give thyself up to despair! O Prince of the Nairritas, he whom the enemy of Indra strikes with his shafts in the fight is not able to preserve his life. To-day you shalt see Rama and Lakshmana lying stretched on the earth, their bodies pierced, torn to pieces by mine arrows, their limbs riddled with my whetted shafts. Bear witness to the well-considered vow of Shakra's enemy re-inforced by my prowess and the divine power! This very day I shall overwhelm Rama and Lakshmana with arrows that never miss their target. Let Indra, Vaivasvata, Vishnu, Rudra, the Sadhyas, Vaishvanara, Candra and Surya this day witness mine immeasurable piowess as redoubtable as that of Vishnu at Bali's place of sacrifice!"
Having spoken thus, that rival of the Lord of the Celestials, craved permission of the king to depart and with fearless soul ascended his chariot, that was as swift as the wind, harnessed to excellent steeds and furnished with weapons, resembling the car of Hari himself. Then he set out for the battlefield immediately and that magnanimous hero was escorted by innumerable warriors, full of ardour, bearing great bows in their hands.
As they advanced, some on the backs of elephants, others on prodigious mounts such as tigers, scorpions, cats, mules, buffalo, serpents, boars, cheetahs, lions and jackals, as large as hills, crows, herons and peacocks, those titans of redoubtable courage were armed with javelins, hammers, sabres, axes and maces. To the sound of conches and the rolling of drums, that valiant enemy of the King of the Gods rushed out to fight. With his parasol, pearly like the moon, that slayer of his foes shone like the firmament when that orb is full. Fanned by marvellous chowries with elegant handles, that warrior, adorned with golden ornaments, the foremost of archers, Indrajita, blazed like the solar disc and he, whose strength was irresistible, illumined Lanka like the burning sun in the sky. Then that intrepid subduer of his foes, on reaching the battlefield, ranged the titans round his chariot and, according to the traditional rites, that Prince of the Titans prayed to the God who feeds on sacrificial offerings, whose brilliance he possessed, reciting the most auspicious mantras, and, offering libations of Soma and roasted grain, with garlands and perfumes, that resplendent leader of the titans invoked Pavaka.
Thereafter he brought there weapons such as Sharapatras, Samidhs and Bibhitakas with red robes and an iron spoon and, heaping the fire with Sharapatras and Tomaras, he seized hold of a live goat by the neck.
Blazing up suddenly the fire gave off no smoke but manifested the signs betokening victory and, having been lit, the flames bright as gold, whirling in a southerly direction, passed through the crucible and instantly consumed the offerings.
Thereafter Indrajita, who was skilled in handling arms, took out the Brahma-weapon and pronounced a mantram on his bow, his chariot and on all. Then he, having uttered the sacred formula and invoked Pavaka, the firmament, the sun, the planets, the moon and the stars, trembled. Having called on the God of Fire, whose brilliance he possessed, he, the equal of Indra in power, whose strength was unimaginable, disappeared in the sky with his bow, arrows, sword, chariot, horses and spear.
Then the army of titans, abundantly furnished with horses and chariots, flags and pennants, burning to fight, set out emitting war cries and, in the struggle, those titans, full of rage, attacked the monkeys with darts of different kinds which were sharp, swift and beautifully wrought, and with spears and hooks. Beholding them, the son of Ravana, addressing those rangers of the night, cried out,"Attack the foe speedily whom you are burning to destroy! Be of good cheer!"
At these words, the titans, in their anxiety to triumph, roared aloud and caused a hail of missiles to descend on those redoubtable monkeys. Arming himself with arrows, maces and clubs, Indrajita, on his side, in the midst of the titans, assaulted the monkeys from where he stood invisible in the sky.
Then those monkeys, struck down in the fight, instantly began to assail Ravani with blows from stones and trees and, full of anger, Indrajita, born of Ravana, that hero full of power, smote the monkeys with a single lance and, in fierce fury, pierced five, seven and nine monkeys at one time to the great delight of the titans. Thereafter that invincible warrior crushed those monkeys under his shafts that glittered like the sun and were decorated with gold.
Their limbs pierced, the monkeys, overwhelmed by those arrows, fell like great Asuras destroyed by the Gods. Before this second Aditya who consumed them with those formidable weapons as his rays, those lions among the monkeys fled away, filled with terror. Their bodies mutilated, their senses confused, they stampeded, bathed in blood and terrified but, in their devotion to Rama, those monkeys, willing to sacrifice their lives, suddenly halted and returned shouting, armed with rocks, and, closing their ranks, showered down a hail of trees, crags and stones on Ravani.
That murderous and fearful avalanche of trees and rocks was however dispersed by the mighty Indrajita, who was ever victorious in combat and, with his arrows as bright as fire, resembling serpents, that prince pierced the ranks of his foes. With eighteen penetrating darts he wounded Gandhamadana; with nine others he struck Nala, who stood some way off, and, in his great strength, he assailed Mainda with seven arrows, tearing out his entrails, and Gaja with seven blunted shafts. Thereafter he pierced Jambavan with ten arrows, Nila with thirty and Sugriva, Rishabha, Angada and Dvivida with dreadful flaming arrows that had been received as boons, thus rendering those foremost of the monkeys insensible, who, struck by innumerable shafts fell under his furious onslaught so that he appeared like the Fire of Death itself.
With the aid of arrows as bright as the sun, loosed with skill, that were exceedingly swift, he scattered those monkey divisions in that great fight and, with transports of the keenest joy, that renowned warrior, born of the Indra of the Titans, witnessed the entire simian army, bathed in blood, overwhelmed with that rain of missiles.
Under that shower of arrows and cruel hail of weapons with which he assailed them, the valiant Indrajita ranged the monkey ranks spreading destruction. Then, leaving his army behind, he speedily flung himself on the monkey forces in that great fight, covering them with a huge wave of formidable shafts like the downpour from a dark cloud.
Victims of his magic arts, their bodies crushed by those missiles loosed by that vanquisher of Shakra, the monkeys, who were as large as rocks, emitted piteous cries, falling in the fray like great hills struck by Indra's thunderbolt, and they could see nothing but those sharp arrows decimating their ranks, whilst the enemy of the King of the Gods, that titan, veiled in his magic power, remained invisible. Then that illustrious Prince of the Titans let fly his whetted shafts that shone like the sun in all directions covering the foremost of the monkeys and destroying them; and he caused spears, swords and axes resembling fire, shooting forth flames like a glowing brazier from which sparks fly, to fall on the ranks of the foremost of the Plavagas. Under the arrows and flaming darts, with which the vanquisher of Indra overwhelmed them, the monkey leaders resembled Kimshuka Trees in full flower.
As they looked upwards, some, struck in the eyes were blinded, and jostling one another, fell to the earth. With the aid of javelins, spears and whetted shafts charged with mantras, Indrajita, the Prince of the Titans, crushed all those warriors, Hanuman, Sugriva, Angada, Gandhamadana, Jambavan, Sushena, Vegadarshin, Mainda, Dvivida, Nila, Gavaksha, Gavaya, Kesarin, Hariloman, Vidyuddamshtra, Suryanana, Jyotimukha, Dadhimukha, Pavakaksha, Nala and Kumuda and, having disarmed those monkey leaders, he caused a shower of glittering darts, like unto the rays of the sun, to fall on Rama, and Lakshmana who accompanied him.
Under the wave of arrows, which he heeded as little as though they were drops of rain, Rama, of prodigious splendour began to ponder within himself and said to his brother,"O Lakshmana, having overwhelmed the simian army, that Indra among the Titans, the enemy of the Gods, trusting in his powerful weapon, now attacks us afresh with his sharp darts! In virtue of the boon he has received from Svyambhu, that hero, full of energy and prowess, has made himself invisible despite his formidable size. How may Indrajita, who has taken up arms against us, be struck down in combat when his body is invisible?
"I recognize this to be the weapon and power of Svyambhu, the Beneficent and Incomprehensible One! With a tranquil heart, O Sagacious Lakshmana, bear the fall of this shaft with me to-day! Let this Indra of Titans, the leader of them all, cover us with a rain of darts! The entire army of the Monkey King, his greatest warriors having been struck down, appears to have lost its splendour, yet when Ravani beholds us lying stretched insensible and impotent, manifesting neither joy nor anger, he will certainly rejoin Ravana, the enemy of the Gods, in his abode, having gained a great victory."
Thereafter Indrajita, overwhelmed them both with a hail of missiles and, having reduced them to a state of impotence, that Indra among the Titans set up a shout of triumph.
In this way, having overcome the simian army in battle, as also Rama and Lakshmana, he returned at once to the city ruled by Ravana's hand where, extolled by the Yatudhanas and filled with delight, he related all to his sire.