At that moment, Sugriva, the illustrious King of the Monkeys, addressed Hanuman in words fraught with wisdom, saying,"Now that Kumbhakarna has been slain and the youthful princes have perished, Ravana can no longer harm us! Therefore let those valiant and agile Plavamgamas, who are able to do so, hurl themselves on Lanka with torches in their hands!"
Meanwhile the sun had withdrawn behind the Astachala Mountains and at the dread hour of night, the foremost of the monkeys approached Lanka with flaming torches and those simian ranks, furnished with fiery brands, rushed in on all sides so that the grim-visaged titan sentinels instantly fled away. Then the monkeys joyfully set fire to gates, pavilions, highways and byways and buildings of every kind, and the dwellings were consumed by thousands, and the public monuments, as high as mountains, toppled down and fell to earth; all was consigned to the flames! Sandal of great price, pearls, brilliant jewels, diamonds and coral, woollen cloths, rich silks, carpets of many kinds made of lambs wool, vases and weapons of gold, countless rare objects, harness and horse cloths, collars and girths for elephants, chariots with their furnishings and decorations, warrior's armour, trappings for their mounts, swords, bows and bow-strings, arrows, spears, goads and lances, cloths of wool and horsehair, tiger skins, innumerable perfumes, palaces enriched with pearls and precious gems, with stores of arms of every kind, all were burnt to ashes. And the fire consumed all the buildings with their ornamentation and devoured the dwellings of the titans who inhabited them.
Clad in armour encrusted with gold, decorated with garlands and other ornaments, their eyes wild with inebriation, wine caused those inhabitants of Lanka to reel as they walked, whilst courtesans clung to their apparel, and they were incensed with fury against their foes. Armed with maces, picks and swords, they were gorging themselves with meat and drink or sleeping on sumptuous beds with the objects of their desire. Full of terror they fled distracted, carrying their sons with them in all haste, whilst their luxurious and splendid mansions, which combined every comfort, were consumed by fire in hundreds and thousands on every side. Those golden buildings that seemed to touch the skies constructed like moons and crescents with their magnificent upper galleries, their trellised windows and terraces decorated with pearls and crystal, re-echoed to the cries of herons, peacocks and the tinkling of ornaments.
Asleep in the many-storied residences, the lovely courtesans, awakened by the flames that scorched them, threw off the jewels that impeded their flight, crying,'Ah! Alas 1' in piercing tones.
Meanwhile the palaces crumbled in the fire that consumed them, and those flaming mansions spread their light afar, like unto the summits of high mountains when struck by Indra's thunderbolts, so that it appeared as if the Peak of Himavat itself were ablaze.
The houses on all sides, wreathed in fire, resembled blossoming Kimshuka Trees; thus did Lanka appear that night! Elephants and horses that had broken loose from their keepers gave the city an appearance of the ocean with its maddened sharks and crocodiles at the time of the end of the world! Here a horse was seen running unchecked or an elephant standing motionless in terror. Lanka in flames illumined the sea, the waters of which, streaked with shadows, seemed to flow with blood.
In an instant, the monkeys had set fire to the city and it looked as if the whole earth were aflame, as at the dread destruction of the world.
Seeing the smoke, the women began to shriek and, when the flames reached them, their cries could be heard at a hundred leagues distance. The titans rushed out of the city, their limbs covered with burns, whereupon the monkeys, eager to come to blows, fell upon them. Monkeys and titans set up such a clamour that it caused the ten regions, the ocean and the whole earth to re-echo.
Meantime, healed of their wounds, the two brothers, Rama and Lakshmana, intrepid warriors, took up their marvellous bows and, when Rama drew that excellent weapon, the dreadful thrumming thereof struck terror in the titans and, whilst he bent his great bow, Raghava shone in glory, as Bhava in his fury when he stretches the bow of the Vedas.
Under the shafts loosed by that warrior, one of the gates of the city, resembling the peak of Mount Kailasha, fell shattered on the earth, and beholding Rama's arrows falling on temples and mansions, those Indras among the titans made a supreme effort and, while they closed their ranks, they emitted leonine roars so that it appeared as if the Night of Final Dissolution was at hand.
Then the leaders of the monkeys received orders from the magnanimous Sugriva, who said,"Enter the nearest gate and begin to fight, O Plavagas 1 If any amongst you acts contrary to my orders, let him be slain!"
Thereupon the monkey leaders bearing torches in their hands, took up their positions at the entrance of the city and, beholding them, Ravana, transported with fury yawned and the ten regions were thrown into confusion so that it seemed as if Rudra were manifesting his wrath. In his rage he sent out Kumbha and Nikumbha, both born of Kumbhakarna, with innumerable titans and, at his command, Yupaksha, Shonitaksha, Prajangha and Kampana set out with the two sons of Kumbhakarna.
Then with the roar of a lion, Ravana said to those valiant warriors,"Go forth immediately, O Titans!"
At his command, those brave titans, with their shining weapons, left Lanka emitting a continuous clamour and, with the splendour of their ornaments and persons they illumined the whole firmament as did the monkeys also with their torches.
Then the light of the moon and stars and the brilliance of the two armies irradiated the heaven whilst the rays of the moon, their ornaments and the planets lit up the ranks of monkeys and titans on all sides and the light from the half-demolished mansions projected lurid flames over the flowing and tumultuous waves.
With their flags and pennants, their swords and excellent axes, their formidable cavalry, chariots and elephants, their innumerable hosts of infantry, their spears, maces, sabres, javelins, darts and shining bows, that terrible army of titans of redoubtable valour and ardour seemed to be furnished with flaming missiles and, amidst the clash of hundreds of gongs, their arms, encased in golden sheaths, were brandishing axes, and the javelins of the titans rang as they struck with their arrows and their great bows, whilst the air was permeated with the fragrance of their garlands and the aroma of wine.
Beholding that formidable army of titans that was not to be withstood, emitting the muttering of a great cloud, the Plavamgamas were agitated and, whilst their terrible opponents advanced towards them they let forth loud cries.
Thereafter the enemy forces hurled themselves upon them like moths into a flame and, their maces whirling in their fevered hands, emitted lightning flashes which increased the exceeding splendour of that host of excellent titans.
Meanwhile, as if a prey to intoxication, the monkeys rushed forward eager to fight, striking those rangers of the night with blows from trees, rocks and fists, whilst they advanced on them loosing their sharp arrows. Then those titans of immense energy, cut off the heads of the monkeys who tore off their ears with their teeth and battered in their skulls with their fists, crushing their limbs with stones as they moved about. Other rangers of the night, of grim aspect, struck the foremost of the monkeys here and there with their sharp swords and the slayer was slain in his turn, cursing and biting as they massacred each other. Then one cried 'Strike!' and was struck in his turn, whilst another called 'It is for me to deal the blow' and yet others called in chorus 'Why trouble thyself? Stay!'
Amidst the stained missiles, armour and shattered weapons, long spears were thrust forward and blows from fists, maces, sabres, javelins and ploughshares were given. Then the encounter between monkeys and titans assumed terrifying proportions and, in the conflict, the rangers of the night slew their enemies in tens of sevens and, in their turn, the army of titans, their raiment in disorder, their armour and standards shattered, were assaulted and hemmed in on all sides by the monkeys.