Seeing Nikumbha slain and Kumbha also laid low, Ravana, in extreme wrath, appeared like unto a raging fire, and that Nairrita, mad with anger and grief, spoke with urgency to the son of Khara, the large-eyed Maharaksha, saying,"Go, O My Son, and, at my command, strike down Raghava and Lakshmana with all the dwellers in the woods."
On this behest, the son of Khara, Maharaksha, who was proud of his courage, answered,"It is well! I shall obey you!" Thereafter, having paid obeisance to Ravana by circumambulating him, that valiant warrior emerged from his sumptuous abode. Then Khara's son addressed the commander of the army, who stood near, saying,"Let my chariot be brought hither immediately and assemble the troops at the earliest moment!"
On this, that night-ranger brought his chariot and assembled the army, whereupon Maharaksha, having paid obeisance to the car and circumambulated it, caused it to be driven forward urging on his charioteer with the words: 'Drive on!'.
Thereafter Maharaksha issued this order to all the titans,"Do you precede me, O Soldiers! As for myself, the magnanimous Ravana has commanded me to slay those two brothers, Rama and Lakshmana, in combat! Today I shall lay them low with my whetted shafts, O Night Rangers, as also the deer of the trees and Sugriva. Today, under the blows of my mace, the great host of monkeys will be destroyed as dry wood by fire!'.
Hearing Maharaksha's words, the rangers of the night, furnished with all sorts of weapons, full of valour, dosed their ranks. Able to change their shape at will, ferocious, endowed with sharp claws, their eyes inflamed, emitting the roar of elephants, causing the hair to stand on end, inspiring terror, those giants surrounded the huge son of Khara, shouting joyfully, shattering the vault of heaven. Then conches and drums sounded by thousands in all the quarters whilst they, leaping and clapping their hands, caused a great tumult.
Thereafter Maharaksha's charioteer suddenly let the goad drop from his hand, and the standard fell to the ground, whilst the horses, harnessed to his chariot, slackened their pace and stumbled as they advanced, mournfully shedding tears, and, as the illustrious Maharaksha set forth, a sinister and biting dust storm arose.
Nevertheless the titans, having witnessed those portents, set out unheeding and full of courage to meet Rama and Lakshmana and their hue was like unto herds of elephants or buffalo and they bore the marks of the blows from maces and swords received in the forefront of battle.
"Here stand I! Here stand I!" cried those seasoned warriors beginning to range to and fro on the battlefield.