Hearing of the death of Maharaksha, Ravana, hitherto victorious in war, became a prey to violent anger, grinding his teeth and, enraged, he reflected on what ought to be done. Having considered the matter, in his wrath he sent his son, Indrajita, out to fight, saying,"Having triumphed over those two powerful brothers, Rama and Lakshmana, return, O Hero! Visible or invisible, you are superior in every way. Were you not victorious in the struggle with Indra of incomparable exploits, therefore why should you not succeed with these two mortals?"
At this command of the King of the Titans, Indrajita, in obedience, proceeded to the place of sacrifice to offer oblations to Pavaka according to the traditional rites. During the ceremony female titans carrying red turbans also came there and took part in sacrificing to the fire. Thereafter titans came up hurriedly to that place where Ravani was, and, in that sacrifice, weapons such as Sharapatras, Bibhitakas, with fuel, red robes and iron ladles were placed there, then, having heaped the fire with Sharapatras and Tomaras, Indrajita seized hold of a living black buck by the neck. And that smokeless brazier devoured the sacred grass, oblations and fuel, whereupon many auspicious omens, indicative of victory, appeared. With its flames, bright as the moon, whirling in a southerly direction, the fire, having been kindled, seized hold of the offerings.
Thereafter, having offered oblations to Agni and gratified the Devas, Danavas and Demons, Indrajita ascended his marvellous car which he had rendered invisible. In his magnificent vehicle harnessed to four horses, that hero, furnished with whetted shafts and armed with his great bow, appeared resplendent. The chariot with its decorations of refined gold, carved with figures of gazelles, moons and crescents shone with beauty; and Indrajita possessed a standard that, with its golden rings and encrustations of emerald, glowed like a brazier.
Under the protection of the Rod of Brahma, like unto the sun, the mighty Ravani was invincible. Setting out from the city, having invoked Agni and acquired the power to make himself invisible by the aid of sacred formulas lawful to titans, the triumphant Indrajita spoke thus,"Today I shall slay those two who have passed their exile in the forest in vain and, in combat, win a decisive victory for my Sire, Ravana. Today, having destroyed Rama and Lakshmana, I shall enjoy the supreme felicity of ridding the earth of monkeys!"
Having spoken thus, he made himself invisible and thereafter rushed furiously into the fray, whither Ravana had despatched him. Effulgent, with bow and shafts, that ardent adversary of Indra, beholding those two valiant heroes like unto a serpent with three heads, who were loosing a stream of arrows in the midst of the monkeys, reflected,'These are those two!' and stretching his bow he covered those warriors with a shower of darts, as Parjanya lets loose his rain. Standing in his aerial car, invisible to the eye, he overwhelmed Rama and Lakshmana with whetted shafts.
Enveloped by those swift darts, Rama and Lakshmana placed celestial arrows on their bows and those two valiant warriors covered the sky with a rain of missiles as bright as the sun, without striking Indrajita.
Thereupon that powerful titan filled the sky with darkness and smoke, blotting out the cardinal points and shrouding himself in a dense fog; and, during his airy flight, neither the twanging of his bow-string nor the sound of the wheels nor the clattering of the horses' hoofs could be heard nor could he himself be seen.
In the midst of that fearful darkness, that long-armed warrior loosed a shower of Narachas so that it appeared like an avalanche of rocks and, with his golden shafts, bestowed on him as a boon, the furious Ravani wounded Rama and Lakshmana grievously in every limb.
Then those two lions among men, overcome by Narachas, like unto mountains under a deluge, loosed their whetted and golden-hafted arrows and those darts, adorned with heron's plumes, struck the son of Ravana in the sky and pierced him in his course, whereupon they fell on the earth covered with blood. Thereafter, those two princes, with the aid of innumerable shafts, sought to sever the mass of missiles in their flight that burned them cruelly, and the two sons of Dasaratha aimed their excellent shafts in the direction whence those whetted darts fell. Ravani, however, a skilled driver, coursing on every side in his chariot, struck the two sons of Dasaratha with swift arrows and sharp shafts. Riddled by the golden-hafted arrows that rained upon them incessantly, the two sons of Dasaratha appeared like Kimshuka Trees in flower.
None could follow the rapidity of the titan's course; none catch a glimpse of him nor his chariot nor his arrows so that he resembled the sun obscured by heavy cloud.
Struck down, wounded and slain by him, the monkeys lay stretched on the earth in hundreds, whereupon Lakshmana, enraged, addressed his brother, saying,"Shall I loose the Brahma Weapon in order to exterminate all the titans?" But Rama, who bore the marks of royalty, answered him,"Nay, it does not behove you to rid the earth of titans! No one may strike him who has withdrawn from the fight, or who has sought protection or has hidden himself or stands before you with joined palms or who is fleeing or intoxicated! O Long-armed Hero, we will strive to slay Indrajita by employing those exceedingly fiery arrows resembling serpents. That magician, that insignificant titan with his invisible chariot will be overthrown by the monkey leaders should he reveal himself. Whether he penetrate heaven or hell or range the firmament, my shafts will consume him wheresoever he may take refuge and he will fall, deprived of life!"
Having spoken these significant words, that hero of the House of Raghu, who was surrounded by the Plavagas, in his great might, reflected on how he should destroy that barbarian, the perpetrator of evil deeds.