Indrajita, having divined the mighty Raghava's intention, withdrew from the fight in order to re-enter the city. Thereafter, remembering the death of those brave titans, his eyes red with anger, the valiant Ravani set forth once more, leaving by the western gate surrounded by titans; and the extremely energetic Indrajita, the descendant of Paulastya, that thorn in the side of the Gods, seeing those warriors, the two brothers, Rama and Lakshmana burning to fight, resorted to magic and caused the illusory figure of Sita to appear in the chariot encircled by a large force and he made seeming preparations to slay her.
For the purpose of deceiving the monkeys, that wretch conceived this design and, advancing to meet them, resolved to slay Sita as it were. Then the monkeys, beholding him approaching, enraged, rushed upon him with rocks in their hands, burning to fight. At their head marched Hanuman, that elephant among monkeys, armed with an enormous mountain peak. And he beheld in the chariot of Indrajita the unfortunate Sita, with a single tress, sorrowful, her features wasted on account of fasting; and the beloved of Raghava wore only a soiled garment nor had she washed her countenance and the limbs of that lovely woman were covered with dust and mud.
Seeing Maithili, Hanuman stood a moment as if stupefied, for, but a little while since, he had beheld the daughter of Janaka and, at the sight of that unfortunate being standing sorrowfully in the car, under the sway of that Indra of Titans, Hanuman thought to himself 'What does this titan intend to do?' Having reflected thus, that great monkey, the foremost of the Plavagas, rushed forward to meet Ravani.
Beholding that simian army, the son of Ravana, transported with rage, drew his sword from its sheath and brandished it over Sita's head in their presence, and he struck that woman in the chariot, who was created by illusion, whilst she cried out, "O Rama, O Rama 1" Then Hanuman, born of Maruta, seeing the titan seize her by her attire, became greatly afflicted and tears of grief fell from his eyes as he beheld the cherished consort of Rama, who was so divinely beautiful. Thereafter, in his anger, he addressed the son of the King of the Titans harshly, saying,"O Wretch, it is to your destruction that you have laid hands on her hair! O Offspring of a family of Brahmarishis, you have fallen into the womb of a female demon. Cursed art you for thine infamous conduct in cherishing such a desire! Cruel and ruthless scoundrel, vile and puerile warrior, art you not ashamed to perpetrate such an infamous deed? O Pitiless One, without a heart, what has Maithili done, torn as she is from her home, her kingdom and the arms of Rama, that you should seek to slay her without mercy? Sita being slain, you shalt undoubtedly not survive long, since, deserving death for such a crime, you have fallen into my hands! When you have yielded up your life's breath, your fate will be the lowest hell to which the slayers of women descend and which is eschewed by the most infamous of evil-doers!"
Speaking thus, Hanuman, attended by armed monkeys, hurled himself in fury on the son of that Indra of Titans who opposed the powerful army of monkeys that surged towards him with his titans of redoubtable ferocity. And he himself assailed that simian host with thousands of arrows and thereafter addressed Hanuman, that monkey leader, saying,"I am about to slay Vaidehi before your eyes, who is the cause of Sugriva, you and Rama, coming hither! She being slain, I shall destroy Rama, Lakshmana, you thyself, O Monkey, and Sugriva, as also the vile Bibishana. You have said 'One must not slay a woman', O Plavagama, but assuredly one is justified in doing that which will injure a foe 1"
Speaking thus, with his sword furnished with a sharp blade, he struck Sita, that illusory phantom, who was sobbing and, having slain her, Indrajita said to Hanuman,"Behold how the beloved of Rama has fallen under my sword! Vaidehi is dead, thine arduous undertaking has been in vain!"
Having thus slain her with his great sword, Indrajita, full of joy, standing in his chariot, began to shout aloud, and the monkeys, ranged before him at no great distance, heard him roaring full throatedly, stationed in his aerial citadel.
Having slain the illusory Sita, the perfidious Ravani manifested great delight and, beholding him fully satisfied, the monkeys, a prey to despair, took to flight.