Whilst Lakshmana, in bis fraternal affection, was consoling Rama, Bibishana, who had been restoring order in the ranks, came to that place.
Four warriors, armed with various weapons, escorted him and they resembled heaps of black collyrium and were like unto the leaders of elephant herds. Then that hero approaching, beheld Raghava plunged in affliction, as also the monkeys themselves, whose eyes were full of tears, and he saw the great-souled Raghava, the joy of the Ikshvaku Race, stunned with burning grief, whereupon Bibishana, his heart pierced with anguish, enquired,"How is this?"
Then Lakshmana, seeing Bibishana, Sugriva and the monkeys, uttered these impetuous words,"Indrajita has slain Sita! Hearing these tidings from Hanuman's lips, Raghava has been overwhelmed with despair, O My Friend!"
As Saumitri was still speaking, Bibishana interrupted him and addressed Rama, whose mind was agitated, in words fraught with good sense, saying,"O Indra among Men, that which you have heard spoken by Hanuman with a sorrowful mien, seems to me as probable as the drying up of the sea! I am fully conversant with the wicked Ravana's design; assuredly he would never permit Sita to be ill-treated, O Long-armed Warrior! Though constantly pressed by me, who desired his welfare, to release Vaidehi, he would never listen to me. Neither by persuasion nor threats, conciliation nor gifts nor by sowing dissension, has anyone been able to behold Sita, how much less by force of arms? It was in order to deceive the monkeys that Indrajita set out to meet them again; this seeming daughter of Janaka is the effect of illusion, O Long-armed Warrior.
"To-day Indrajita is going to the sacrificial ground of Nikumbhila to offer an oblation. Having performed the sacrifice, on leaving, the son of Ravana will be invincible in battle even to the Gods led by Vasava. It is he, in the role of a skilled magician, who has made use of this illusion in order to undermine the courage of the monkeys. Let us leave now with our forces ere he accomplishes his object. Shake off the distress that has visited you on this account, O Lion among Men! The whole army is dispirited on beholding the grief that overwhelms you. Come, pluck up courage, rise, call up your valour and command Lakshmana to join with us and the troops which we command.
"With his whetted shafts, that lion among men will compel Ravani to break off his sacrifice, after which he may be slain. Your brother's sharp and penetrating arrows, that fly on wings and resemble birds of prey, will drink his blood. O Long-armed Warrior, let Lakshmana, who is endowed with auspicious marks, bear down on that titan in order to destroy him, as Indra looses his thunderbolt. O Best of Men, it is not fitting to defer the slaying of a foe; now suffer Lakshmana to fall on thine adversary speedily in order to slay him, as Mahadeva looses his thunderbolt on the enemies of the Gods in order to exterminate them."