Thus did the titan speak, but Raghava, who was overwhelmed with grief, did not fully comprehend what was said to him. Thereafter, having regained his strength, Rama, the Conqueror of Hostile Citadels, answered Bibishana, who was seated at his side, saying,"O Bibishana, Prince of the Nairritas, I desire to hear once more what you have said to me; do you repeat what I long to know."
Hearing these words of Raghava, Bibishana, skilled in discourse, repeated that which he had already told him, saying,"The behests you didst lay upon me, O Long-armed Warrior, regarding the disposal of the forces, have been carried out scrupulously; the divisions of the army are drawn up on all sides and the leaders have each had their posts allotted to them. O Mighty Lord, now hear what I have to impart further.
"O Prince, beholding you afflicted, we are discouraged; abandon your distress, that grief which conduces to the joy of the foe afar off! Take courage, O Hero, and destroy the rangers of the night! May felicity be thine, since you are to be re-united with Sita! O Joy of the House of Raghu, listen to my sage counsel! Let Saumitri set out bravely at the head of a considerable force and converge on the Nikumbhila Grove, in order to slay Ravani in combat by the aid of arrows, resembling venomous snakes, loosed from his bow!
"That warrior, on account of his asceticism received a marvellous boon, the Brahmashira Weapon, from Svyambhu and also steeds that course at his will; he has undoubtedly reached the Nikumbhila Grove with his forces! If he succeeds in carrying through the sacrifice, know that we are lost!
"'The foe who strikes you ere you have reached the Nikumbhila Grove and ignited the fire, armed as you are, will bring about your death, O Enemy of Indra!' Such were the words pronounced by the Lord of the World and thus was the end of that crafty titan ordained! O Rama, send your powerful brother to slay Indrajita and, he being slain, Ravana with his friends is also slain!"
Bibishana having spoken thus, Rama answered him saying,"O You, whose prowess is truth, I know the magic power of that barbarian; his knowledge of the Brahma Weapon endows that skilful and great magician with immense power so that he is able to deprive the Gods and Varuna himself of consciousness in combat! While he ranges the sky in his chariot, O Illustrious Prince, one is no more able to follow his course than that of the sun in the midst of heavy cloud!"
Then Raghava, who was conversant with the magic power of that crafty foe, said to Lakshmana who shone with effulgence,"Go with the entire army of the Lord of the Monkeys with its generals and Hanuman at their head, O Lakshmana; take the army of the bears with their leader Jambavan, and destroy the titan possessed of the power of magic. This magnanimous night-ranger will follow you with his ministers in order that you mayest fall upon that master of illusion."
Hearing these words of Raghava, Lakshmana of redoubtable courage, who was accompanied by Bibishana, took up his rare bow, the foremost of all, and donning his mail, furnished with a sword and arrows, and full of joy, addressed him thus,"To-day the arrows loosed from my bow, having pierced Ravani, will lay Lanka waste as herons ravage a lotus pool! This very day the shafts speeding from my bow will pierce the body of that barbarian!"
Having spoken thus to his brother, the illustrious Lakshmana, eager to slay Ravani, departed with all speed and, having paid obeisance to the feet of his elder brother and circumambulated him, he set out for the Nikumbhila Grove, the place of sacrifice, where Ravani was to be found. Followed by Bibishana, Prince Lakshmana, burning with courage, with the good wishes of his brother, hastened away. Then Hanuman, at the head of countless monkeys and Bibishana with his counsellors speedily followed in his wake.
Whilst the great hosts of monkeys threw themselves in his train, Lakshmana beheld the forces of the King of the Bears stationed in the way. Thereafter Sumitra's son, the joy of his friends, having already covered a great distance, observed the army of the King of the Titans ranged for battle and, bow in hand, that conqueror of his foes, the joy of the House of Raghu, coming upon that skilful magician, prepared to enter into combat with him in conformity with Brahma's ordinance, and that prince, who was full of ardour, was accompanied by Bibishana, the valiant Angada and also the son of Anila.
Thereafter Lakshmana, as one entering into darkness, penetrated into the ranks of the countless enemy host that was exceedingly formidable, blazing with its glittering weapons and shaded by its dense rows of mighty chariots with their standards.