Having spoken thus, Bibishana, delighted, taking Saumitri, who bore his bow in his hand, hastened away. Proceeding some distance, they entered a great wood where Bibishana pointed out Indrajita's place of sacrifice to Lakshmana and the illustrious brother of Ravana showed Saumitri a huge Nyagrodha Tree of fearful aspect, resembling a dark cloud, and said,"It is here that the powerful son of Ravana offers up his victims and thereafter enters into combat. Becoming invisible to all creatures, the titan overthrows his enemies in the fight, paralysing them with his excellent shafts. Do you pierce the valiant son of Ravana, his chariot, steeds and charioteer with your flaming darts ere he reaches the Nyagrodha Tree!"
"Be it so!" replied the mighty Saumitri, the delight of his friends and, taking his stand, he drew his marvellous bow.
Thereafter Indrajita, the powerful son of Ravana appeared before them in his chariot, that shone like fire, clad in armour with his sword and banner. Burning with ardour, Lakshmana challenged that invincible descendant of Paulastya, saying,"I challenge you to combat I Let it be in fair fight!"
Thus accosted, the brave and exceedingly energetic Indrajita, observing Bibishana, overwhelmed him with reproaches, saying,"O You, born and bred in this race, the brother of my sire, why dost you seek to harm his son, O My Paternal Uncle, O Titan? For you, O Wretch, there is neither tradition, brotherly feeling nor a sense of duty! O Impious One, You are to be pitied! O Perverse Being, you are the object of reproach to the virtuous, you who didst abandon thine own kind in order to seek service with the enemy. Is it not a want of intelligence in you, that you dost not discern the great difference between living with one's kindred and seeking a miserable refuge with strangers? Even if a stranger be endowed with every quality and a relation bereft of them all, yet the kinsman, though wanting in all merit, is to be preferred; a stranger is always a stranger! He who renounces his own kind to follow another will perish under the blows of the enemy after his own kinsfolk have been destroyed. You alone art capable of such ruthlessness and so relentless an attitude to your kind, O Ranger of the Night, O Younger Brother of Ravana!"
Thus addressed by his brother's son, Bibishana answered,"Art you ignorant of my character that you dost reproach me thus, O Titan? O Perverse Prince, do not insult me but treat me with respect. Albeit I have been born in the race of titans, I possess those principles which appertain to men, my nature is not that of the demons! Nay, I do not delight in cruelty nor does injustice find favour with me but, even if his character be dissimilar, how can a brother banish his own brother? The one, who rejects him who renounces his duty and is bent on evil-doing, is assured of good fortune, as one who shakes off a snake from his hand. One is told to fly that perverse wretch who habitually purloins his neighbour's goods and has intercourse with other's wives, as one would flee from a burning dwelling.
"To take possession of another's property or to look with desire on his neighbour's wife or to distrust one's friends are the three faults that lead to destruction! The ruthless slaughter of the great sages, the war on the Gods, arrogance, anger, hate and self-will are the defects of my brother, who is destroying himself and his empire, obscuring his good qualities as clouds veil the mountains. It is on account of his vices that I abandoned my brother, whose son you are. You, your father and Lanka are doomed! O Titan, You are a mere boy possessed of an overweening pride and art ill-mannered! Say what you will to me, you are caught in the noose of death I You shalt suffer the penalty you have merited for the harsh reproaches you have made to me this day! From henceforth you shalt not be able to approach the Nyagrodha Tree, O Vilest of the Titans! Having outraged Kakutstha, you canst not survive! Enter into combat with this God among men! Fall on the field of battle and go to the abode of Yama to the satisfaction of the Gods! Display your prowess, exhaust your weapons and missiles but if you approachest within the range of Lakshmana's shafts, you and thine army shalt not return alive!"