Hearing Bibishana's words, Indrajita, seething with anger, answered him with fresh invectives and advanced upon him in fury. Standing in his richly decorated chariot, that was yoked to black steeds, his weapons and sword upraised, bearing his mighty, pliant and terrible bow and his arrows that were fatal to the foe, he resembled the Destroyer, Death Himself.
Then Lakshmana in all his splendour appeared before that mighty archer standing in his car, decked with ornaments, the slayer of his foes, the valiant son of Ravana, and, transported with fury, Indrajita addressed Saumitri, who was seated on Hanuman's back and resembled the rising sun, and Bibishana also and the foremost of the monkeys, saying,"Do you all behold my prowess! In an instant, a rain of arrows speeding from mine irresistible bow will fall upon you in the fight like unto a shower of rain from the sky! Soon the shafts loosed from my great bow will scatter your limbs as the wind a heap of cotton! Pierced by my sharp darts, spears, lances, daggers and other weapons, this day I shall send you all to the abode of Yama! When, roaring like a thundercloud, I scatter the waves of mine arrows with a steady hand in the fray, who can stand before me?
"Formerly in a night engagement, with my darts that are equal to thunderbolts, I overthrew you both, leaving you unconscious with your escort; hast you forgotten it? Since you desirest to measure your strength with mine, I who in my fury resemble a venomous reptile, I deem you are anxious to enter the region of death!"
Hearing the taunts of Ravani, that Indra among the Titans, the son of Raghu replied indignantly,"It is not easy to succeed in those undertakings of which you dost boast and, in fact, he who accomplishes his end, alone is skilful! O You whose situation is desperate, you deemest to have attained your purpose in this enterprise which is untenable from every aspect, merely by saying I have accomplished mine end! O Insensate One, rendering thyself invisible on the field of battle is the procedure of a rogue; honest men do not practice it! Since I am within the range of your shafts, O Titan, manifest your prowess; of what use is this bragging?"
Thus addressed, Indrajita who was ever victorious in combat, stretched his dread bow and with a powerful arm let fly his whetted shafts on his adversary. Discharged by him, those swift arrows resembling venomous snakes, struck Lakshmana hissing like serpents, and the impetuous son of Ravana, Indrajita, with those arrows of extreme velocity, overwhelmed Saumitri, who was endowed with auspicious marks, whereupon the fortunate Lakshmana, his limbs pierced by those darts, covered in blood, shone like a smokeless flame!
Meanwhile Indrajita, contemplating his feat, advanced, emitting an exceedingly loud cry and said,"O Saumitri, the feathered shafts loosed upon you from my bow will rob you of your life, for their impact is mortal I This very day, O Lakshmana, bands of jackals, eagles and vultures will descend upon you when you have fallen unconscious under my blows! Rama of perverse soul will see you, his devoted brother, struck down by mine arm, thine armour shattered, your bow in pieces, your head severed, you who art a warrior by birth only!"
To these insolent words of Ravana's son, the sagacious Lakshmana replied in measured and judicious terms, saying,"Cease from boasting, O Wretched Titan of crooked ways, what purpose is served by vain speech? Demonstrate your valour in action; you dost vaunt thine exploits ere you have accomplished them! To what end, O Titan? Act in such a way that I may believe in thine utterances! Mark how, without addressing a single word of contempt or provocation to you and without bragging, I shall slay you, O Last of Warriors!"
Thus speaking, Lakshmama, with five Natachas loosed with great force from his bow, which he stretched up to his ear, struck the titan full in the breast and those feathered shafts of swift flight, resembling fiery serpents, shone in the breast of the Nairrita like the rays of the sun.
Struck by those darts, the son of Ravana, enraged, in his turn, pierced Lakshmana with three well-aimed arrows. Thereupon an appalling and fearful exchange of blows ensued between those lions among men and titans, who sought to triumph over each other. Valiant and endowed with strength, both courageous by nature, each found it hard to overcome the other, neither having his equal in energy and prowess. Resembling two planets coursing through the heavens, those two heroes strove, so that they seemed like those two invincible warriors, Bala and Vritra, struggling proudly like two lions, standing immoveable as they showered innumerable darts on each other, and that King of Men and Prince of the Titans fought on with extreme ardour.