Lakshmana, graced with auspicious marks, his limbs bathed in blood, having slain that conqueror of his foes on the battlefield, experienced supreme satisfaction.
Taking with him Jambavan, Hanuman and all the inhabitants of the woods, the valiant and illustrious Lakshmana speedily returned to Sugriva and Raghava, leaning on Bibishana and Hanuman. Thereafter, having circumambulated Rama and paid obeisance to him, Saumitri stood beside his brother as Upendra by Indra.
Then that hero, Bibishana, approaching with a look which itself was eloquent of delight, described Indrajita's fearful end and it was with joy that Rama learned how the head of Ravani had been severed by the great-souled Lakshmana and the tidings that Indrajita had fallen under Lakshmana's blows filled that valiant prince with unequalled felicity so that he cried out,"Well done, O Lakshmana, this exceedingly difficult feat pleases me! Ravani's death means victory, be assured thereof."
Thereafter, smelling the head of Lakshmana, who had increased his glory yet who was abashed, the mighty Rama caused him to be seated on his lap and, with gentle strength, having clasped his brother, who was wounded, to his breast, he gazed upon him tenderly again and again. Then Rama, smelling his head once more, passed his hand rapidly over his body and, in order to sooth him, said,"You have accomplished an auspicious and highly momentous feat, O You whose exploits are beyond the power of others 1 Now that his son is slain, I deem Ravana to be defeated. To-day the death of that perverse wretch confers victory over Ravana, the Scourge of Men, upon me, be you blessed, O Warrior! You have severed the right arm of the King of the Titans on which he leant for support! Bibishana and Hanuman too, bore themselves with valour in the great fight. In three days, that warrior was utterly vanquished; from now I am delivered from my foes, for Ravana will assuredly come forth, setting out with considerable forces. When, on hearing of the death of his son, which will overwhelm him with grief, the King of the Titans advances surrounded by his vast army, I shall encircle him with my powerful forces and slay him, difficult though it be. The conqueror of Indra having fallen in combat with you, under your direction, O Lakshmana, neither Sita nor the earth itself would be hard to regain."
Having lavished comfort and caresses on his brother, the son of Raghu, Rama, joyfully addressed Sushena, saying,"Do you pluck out the arrows from the highly intelligent Saumitri, who is ever devoted to his friends, and restore him. Speedily heal the wounds of Saumitri, who is attached to his friends, and do you nurse back to health all those who received blows and wounds in the conflict, those bears and monkeys whose valiant battalions have trees as their weapons."
At these words of Rama, the powerful monkey leader, Sushena, administered a sovereign remedy to Lakshmana's nostrils and having inhaled it, that hero was at once liberated from his darts and wounds. Restored to his normal state and freed from the arrows, his burning pains at an end, his fever suddenly allayed, Saumitri experienced supreme delight. Thereupon Rama, the King of the Plavagas, Bibishana and the valiant Chief of the Bears with their forces, seeing Saumitri standing free from pain, rejoiced exceedingly.
Then that supremely difficult exploit of Lakshmana's was praised by Dasarathi of great soul, and, recollecting that the conqueror of Indra had fallen in the fight, the King of the Monkeys was filled with joy.