All those thousands of elephants and horses and those mounted upon them with the myriad chariots bright as fire and their flaming banners, as also the innumerable titans who were full of valour, able to change their form at will, armed with maces and axes and wonderful golden pennants, fell under the fiery darts, decorated with fine gold, of Rama of imperishable exploits.
Beholding this and hearing those tidings, the rangers of the night, who had escaped the carnage, were filled with terror and those wretched titans were united in a common misfortune.
The female titans and those who had lost their sons and kinsfolk, overwhelmed with affliction, assembled to wail and lament, crying,"How did Shurpanakha, who was old, hideous and of sunken belly, dare to approach Rama in the forest, he who was the equal of Kandarpa himself? Seeing that handsome youth, full of nobility, ever engaged in the welfare of all beings, that monstrous Rakshasi, who should have been slain by others, was overpowered by lust. How could she, who was devoid of all good qualities, dare to make love to the all-powerful Rama who is possessed of comely features and endowed with every virtue? To the detriment of her own race, despite her grey hair and wrinkles, through a ridiculous infatuation condemned by all, that hideous creature pursued Raghava with her importunities to the destruction of the Titans, Dushana and Khara.
"It was on her account that Ravana committed this offence, the fatal bearing away of Sita, the daughter of Janaka, and has provoked the emnity of the implacable and powerful Raghava.
"When the Demon Viradha sought to possess Vaidehi, he fell before her under Rama's blows; this example should have proved sufficient! And fourteen thousand titans of terrible deeds were cut down in Janasthana by Rama's shafts resembling flaming torches, whilst, in the fight, Khara was also slain with Dushana and Trishiras by his darts that glittered like the sun; this too should have been sufficient to prove his prowess!
"Kabandha too, with his arms four miles in length, who lived on blood, was slain despite his fury and screams; this too was a manifestation of Rama's might. He slew the powerful son of that God of a Thousand Eyes, the mighty Bali who was as dark as a cloud, this too proved his valour! And Sugriva, who dwelt disconsolate on Rishyamukha, the vehicle of his hopes shattered, was restored to the throne by Rama, which was a further proof of his power.
"All the titans counselled Ravana to his advantage, and Bibishana, in accord with his duty, offered him good advice in reasonable words but, in his folly, that monarch disregarded them. If the younger brother of Dhanada had given ear to Bibishana, Lanka, which has now become a cemetery, would not have been laid waste.
"When he learnt that the mighty Kumbhakarna had been slain by Raghava and that the invincible Atikaya had fallen under Lakshmana's blows, as also Indrajita, his beloved son, still Ravana remained blind to the truth!
"'My son, my brother, my lord has perished in the fight' is the cry heard from the female titans in every family. Chariots, horses and elephants have been struck down in their thousands by the mighty Rama and are lying here and there with the foot soldiers whom he has also slain. He who is destroying us is Rudra or Vishnu or Mahendra or the God of a Hundred Sacrifices, in the form of Rama, unless he be the God of Death himself! We live bereft of hope; our warriors slain by Rama; we see no end to our fears and we lament the loss of our defenders.
"On account of the great boons he has received, Dashagriva seems unaware of the appalling peril that faces him at the hands of Rama. Neither Devas, Gandharvas, Pisacas or Rakshasas will be able to rescue him when he falls into Rama's power. Each time Ravana has entered the lists against Rama, inauspicious omens have appeared foretelling his destruction!
"When the Grandsire of the World was gratified with him, he received immunity from Devas, Danavas and Rakshasas but he did not ask to be protected from man. Here without doubt is one of those who will prove fatal to the titans and Ravana.
"Oppressed by that titan, who was filled with arrogance on account of the boon he had obtained through his severe penances, the Vibudhas took refuge with Brahma and, in order to be of service to them, the magnanimous Grandsire of the World uttered these memorable words,"'From to-day the Danavas and Rakshasas shall not cease to wander through the Three Worlds harried by constant fear 1'
"Meantime the Gods with Indra at their head approached the Destroyer of Tripura, the God whose vehicle is the bull, who received them favourably and, being gratified, Mahadeva said to them,"'For your salvation, a woman will be born who will bring about the destruction of the titans! This woman, whom the Gods will employ, as formerly hunger was used to wipe out the Danavas, will be the destroyer of the titans and Ravana.'
By bearing Sita away in his perversity and misconduct, Ravana has dug a fearful abyss in which all will be engulfed! Who is there in the world who can rescue us? We have fallen into Raghava's hands, who is the equal of Time, the Destroyer of the Worlds!
"As elephants (that are) trapped in a blazing forest, there is no refuge for us in this extreme peril! The magnanimous Bibishana chose the fitting moment to take refuge with him from whom he foresaw the danger was to come."
Thus did the consorts of those rangers of the night lament with piercing cries, in despair, plunged in grief and terror, their arms interlaced.