In that fearful struggle, both armies gradually melted away under each others' blows like two lakes drying up under the summer heat. The destruction of his forces and the death of Virupaksha redoubled the fury of the Lord of the Titans. Seeing his army decimated and destroyed by the monkeys, he recognized that destiny was opposing him and he became apprehensive.
Thereafter he addressed Mahodara, who stood near him, saying,"From now on, O Long-armed Warrior, you are my only hope of victory! Go, triumph over the enemy forces! Display your heroism to-day; the time has come to return the favours your master has bestowed on you! Fight bravely!"
At these words, that foremost of titans, Mahodara replied,"Be it so!" and rushed on the enemy's army as a butterfly into a flame. Then that exceedingly powerful titan, whose ardour had been stimulated by the words of his master and also on account of his own native valour, began to create carnage among the monkeys.
From their side, the noble-hearted monkeys, arming themselves with enormous stones, penetrated into the ranks of the redoubtable titans and slew them all. And Mahodara, at the height of fury, with his golden shafts severed the hands, feet and thighs of the monkeys in the great struggle and they, after a hard fight with the titans, fled to different quarters, some taking refuge with Sugriva.
Witnessing the rout of his powerful army, Sugriva rushed upon Mahodara and the Lord of the Monkeys, seizing a huge and formidable rock resembling a hill, threw it at him with great force, in order to crush him.
Seeing the stone falling, Mahodara, unmoved, cut it to pieces with his arrows. Under the titan's darts, it fell in a thousand fragments on the earth so that it resembled a flock of frightened vultures. Beholding that rock broken, Sugriva, mad with anger, tore up a Sala Tree and flung it at his adversary, who broke it into many pieces. With his shafts, that hero, the scourge of his foes, broke the tree, whereupon Sugriva, observing an iron stake lying on the ground, brandished the flash ng bar before the eyes of the titan and, with one exceedingly violent blow, struck down his excellent steeds.
Leaping down from his great car, its team of horses having been slain, the valiant Mahodara, highly provoked, took hold of a mace and the two warriors, one armed with an iron bar and the other with a mace, approached each other, bellowing like bulls, resembling two clouds charged with lightning. In fury, the night-ranger, his lustrous mace glittering like the sun, rushed on Sugriva and, as the terrible club was falling upon him, the extremely valiant leader of the monkeys, his eyes red with anger, lifted up his weapon and struck, whereupon the bar instantly fell shattered to the earth. Then Sugriva, boiling with rage, from the ground picked up a huge club gilded on all sides and, brandishing it, hurled it against the mace, striking it, whereupon, on the impact, the two missiles broke in pieces and fell on the field.
Their weapons shattered, the two warriors attacked each other with blows of their fists and, full of ardour and strength, resembled two lit braziers. Amidst loud cries, they struck each other and, having interchanged blows, rolled on the earth. Leaping up immediately, the two pugilists, great champions, scourgers of their foes, exhausted each other, whereupon each seized hold of a sword that lay within reach and, transported with rage, threw themselves upon each other, their weapons upraised. Then those two spirited and experienced warriors moved rapidly from left to right of one another, each seeking to slay his opponent. Meantime the courageous, impetuous and wicked Mahodara, proud of his strength, pierced Sugriva's heavy mail with his sword whereupon the weapon snapped on the impact. Then that elephant among monkeys, with his own sword, severed the titan's head bearing a helmet and adorned with earrings.
Beholding their leader lying headless on the ground, the whole army of titans melted away and, having slain Mahodara, the monkey with his forces began to cheer, whereupon Dashagriva grew furious and Raghava was filled with joy.
With downcast mien, the titans, overwhelmed, all fled away mad with terror, but the son of Surya,1 having laid Mahodara low, who resembled part of a great mountain, shone with effulgence like that orb itself with its inextinguishable brilliance. And the hosts of the Gods, Siddhas, Yakshas and also the beings who move on the surface of the earth, gazed with great delight on the King of the Monkeys, who had achieved that supreme victory.