At the command of the magnanimous Sugriva, Hanuman, with one bound, left the Mountain Rishyamuka and placed himself in the path of the two Raghavas.
Discarding his monkey form, Hanuman, the son of Maruta, by the power of illusion, assumed the guise of a wandering monk and, in gentle and pleasing tones, addressed those two brothers with humility, paying obeisance to them.
Approaching those two heroes, that Foremost of Monkeys praised them as they deserved, offering them every courtesy and in accord with Sugriva's wish spoke graciously to them, saying:—
"O Ascetics of renowned penance, who are full of faith and valour and who resemble the Rishis and the Gods, why have you come to this region, sowing fear amongst the herds of deer and other denizens of the forest, surveying the trees on every side that grow on the borders of Pampa, that lake of sparkling waves, the splendour of which you enhance with your radiance, O Heroes of Great Daring?
"O Valiant Strangers, who are you, whose skin gleams like gold and who are clad in robes of bark, possessing strong arms, you who are sighing deeply and whose sight inspires fear in all beings? You have the air of lions or warriors who are full of courage and heroism, armed as you are with bows, resembling Indra's, the Destroyers of your Foes?
"Full of majesty and beauty, mighty as great bulls, your arms resembling the trunks of elephants, radiant, the first among men, youthful, illumining the king of the mountains with your effulgence, you who are worthy of ruling kingdoms and like unto the Gods, what purpose brings you here? O Heroes, whose eyes are as large as lotus petals, who wear your matted locks coiled like crowns on your heads, who resemble each other, have you come hither from the celestial region? Verily the sun and moon have descended to earth of their own free will. O Broad-chested Warriors, you who are men, yet have the aspect of divine beings, whose shoulders are like unto a lion's, who are endowed with great strength and resemble two bulls intoxicated with desire, whose large and massive arms look like clubs that should be adorned with every kind of ornament, yet bear none, it seems that you are both worthy of ruling the whole earth, whose decorations are the Vindhya and Meru mountains with their lakes and forests. How beautiful are your two shining bows, glistening with perfumed paste, covered with gold and shining like the mace of Indra; the two quivers also, filled with sharp death-dealing and formidable arrows resembling hissing snakes; your two swords of immense length and size, encrusted with fine gold that gleam like serpents that have just cast their slough! But why do you not answer me?
"Sugriva is the name of that virtuous King of the Monkeys, that hero banished by his brother, who roams the earth in great distress. I have come here under the orders of that magnanimous one, the Chief of the Great Monkeys. The illustrious Sugriva desires your friendship. Know me to be his minister, a monkey, the son of Pavana, ranging where I please and coming here under the guise of a wandering monk from the Rishyamuka Mountain in order to please him."
Having addressed those two heroes, Rama and Lakshmana, in discreet and courteous terms, Hanuman fell silent and hearing that speech, the blessed Rama, delighted, addressed Lakshmana who stood beside him, saying:—
"This is the minister of the King of the Monkeys, the magnanimous Sugriva, whom I seek. O Saumitri, answer Sugriva's counsellor who is eloquent and warm-hearted and the subduer of his foes in courteous terms. Only one versed in the Rig-Veda and, who is conversant with the Yajur and the Sama Vedas, would speak thus. He has studied grammar thoroughly, and though he has spoken at length, it has been void of error. I see naught to offend, either in his mouth, his eyes, his brow, limbs, or attitude. His speech is neither lacking in fulness, depth, assurance or distinction; his voice issues from his breast in clear modulated tones. He expresses himself with admirable felicity without any hesitation; his tone is harmonious and moves the heart agreeably. What foe, having drawn his sword, would not be disarmed by the charm of that voice that enunciates each syllable so perfectly. O Irreproachable Prince, the king who employs messengers gifted with such talent is certain to succeed in all his undertakings, since they are enhanced at the very outset, by such eloquence."
On this, Saumitri addressed that eloquent minister of Sugriva's in well-chosen words, saying:—•"O Sage, we have been told of the great attributes of Sugriva and are at this moment looking for that King of the Monkeys. That which he commands we will carry out on thine instructions, O Excellent Hanuman."
When he heard this gracious speech, that monkey, born of Pavana, who wished nothing more than that Sugriva should triumph, resolved to bring about a friendly alliance between Rama and his master.