Listening to Lakshmana's courteous words and marking the feeling of goodwill towards his master, Hanuman, deeming Rama would be willing to assist him, joyfully reflected that Sugriva's triumph was already assured.
He thought: "Undoubtedly the magnanimous Sugriva will not fail to regain his kingdom, for here is one who will enable him to accomplish his design."
Then the wholly delighted and eloquent Hanuman, the Foremost of Monkeys, said to Rama:—"What brings you with your younger brother to this perilous and inaccessible forest?"
On this enquiry, Lakshmana, prompted by his brother, related the history of Rama, the son of Dasaratha, to him.
"There was a king named Dasaratha, who was illustrious, fixed in his duty and, according to the law, the protector of the four castes. Without a foe, he himself hating none, he appeared to all living beings to be a second Brahma.
"The firstborn son of Dasaratha, who possessed every excellent quality, the refuge of all, endowed with royal virtues and of great majesty, was banished from his dominion and obedient to the behests of his sire, has come to dwell in the forest. Submitting to the paternal decree, he was followed by his consort, Sita, as the glorious sun by the sunset glow at evening.
"My name is Lakshmana. I, who am inferior to him in every respect, am his brother and accompany him as his servant. This dutiful prince, who is ever mindful of what should be done, is extremely learned and this hero, who spends his life in promoting the welfare of all beings, who is worthy of happiness and honour, deprived of supreme power, passes his days in the forest. A titan, who was able to change his form at will, carried off his consort, she being alone, and her abductor is unknown to us.
"The son of Diti, Danu, who, through a curse, had been forced to assume the form of a titan, imparted the name of Sugriva, the King of the Monkeys, to us. Now I have answered thine enquiries fully in all sincerity; Rama and I both seek the help of Sugriva. The distributor of all wealth, he, who has reached the peak of glory and was formerly the guardian of the worlds, has come to seek Sugriva's protection. The son of that instructor of his people, who was devoted to his duty, of whom Sita was the daughter-in-law, Rama, seeks the protection of Sugriva. The strong defender of the whole universe, that was formerly his highway, my Guru Rama, whom you seest here, has come to seek refuge with Sugriva. He, under whose compassion all beings rest, Rama, has come to appeal to the goodwill of that King of the Monkeys. It is the eldest son of King Dasaratha, who was endowed with every good attribute and on this earth constantly showered honours on monarchs, Rama, renowned in the Three Worlds, who now seeks refuge in Sugriva, Lord of the Monkeys. Rama, a victim to grief, overwhelmed with affliction, has come as a suppliant! It is for Sugriva with the leaders of the monkey tribes to show favour to him."
Hearing Lakshmana, uttering this appeal, his tears flowing the while, Hanuman graciously replied:—
"Such suppliants, endowed with wisdom, who have mastered their anger and other passions and whose fortune has led them to his presence, are worthy to be brought before that Indra of Monkeys. He too is exiled from his kingdom and the object of his brother's enmity, who has carried off his consort and, after maltreating him cruelly, forced him to flee trembling to the forest. That offspring of Surya, Sugriva, will form a pact of friendship with you, and I shall accompany him in his search for Sita."
Having spoken thus in a gentle and kindly tone, Hanuman said to Raghava in friendly accents:—"Let us seek out Sugriva."
At these words, the righteous Lakshmana bowed courteously to him and addressed the virtuous Raghava, saying:—
"What this monkey, born of the Wind-God, has gladly told us, his master will carry out; it is here that your purpose will find fulfilment, O Rama. Goodness is painted on his countenance; he speaks cheerfully and his words ring true."
Then that extremely intelligent son of Maruta, Hanuman, went away, taking the two heroes, the descendants of Raghu, with him. Abandoning the guise of a mendicant and assuming the form of a monkey, that great ape, taking those two warriors on his shoulders, departed.
Thereafter, that intelligent son of Pavana, who was renowned among the monkeys and endowed with great prowess, delighted to have accomplished his design, scaled the mountain with immense bounds taking Rama and Lakshmana with him.