In his joy, Sugriva addressed Raghava, the delight of the House of Raghu, once again, saying: "I have learnt thine history from my servant, the best of counsellors, Hanuman, and why you have come to these sylvan solitudes, where you residest with your brother Lakshmana.
"Borne away by a titan, your consort, Maithili, the daughter of Janaka, is grieving far from you and the sagacious Lakshmana. That titan seeking an opportunity to do you mischief, having slain the vulture, Jatayu, carried off your consort, thus rendering you unhappy. You shalt soon be freed from the sorrow that the abduction of your loved one causes you.
"Whether she is to be found in heaven or hell, I shall seek out that lady and bring her back to you, O Conqueror of Thine Enemies! Know well, I speak truly, O Raghava. Sita is not destined to be the food of gods or titans; your consort will prove to be a poisoned dish to them!
"Banish your grief, I will bring your dear one back to you. As I surmised, it was undoubtedly Sita that I saw when that titan of cruel deeds bore her away. She was crying: 'O Rama! O Lakshmana!' in a pitiful voice and struggling in Ravana's arms, like the female of the Serpent King.
"Seeing me with my five companions standing on the summit of the mountain, she dropped her cloak and magnificent jewels, which we collected and preserved, O Rama. I will bring them to you and you will perchance be able to call them to remembrance."
On this, Rama answered Sugriva in all affection and said:—"Go quickly and bring them to me here without delay, O Friend!"
At these words, Sugriva, intent on pleasing Rama, ran in all haste to a deep cave in the mountain, and seizing the cloak and jewels, that monkey showed them to Rama, saying:—"These are they, O Raghava!"
Then Rama, taking the raiment and the sparkling jewels, found his eyes to be misty with tears, as the moon is veiled in cloud, tears that in his affection for Sita fell in torrents, and, losing his composure, he fell to the earth, sobbing: "O My Dear One!"
Pressing the precious jewels to his breast, heaving deep sighs like the furious hissing of a snake in its hole, his eyes streaming with tears, perceiving Lakshmana at his side, he began to lament bitterly, saying:—
"O Lakshmana, behold Vaidehi's cloak and jewels, which, while being carried away, she allowed to fall on the earth; without doubt, it was on this grassy slope that Sita, while being borne away, scattered her ornaments, their condition confirms it."
Hearing Rama's words, Lakshmana said:—"I do not recognize the bracelets or earrings, but I know the anklets, for I worshipped her feet alone."
Then Rama said to Sugriva:—"In what place didst you behold Vaidehi, my chaste spouse, dearer to me than life itself? What hideous titan bore her away? Where does that monster dwell, who has plunged me in this mourning? Having carried Sita away and kindled my wrath, he has forfeited his life and opened the portals of death. Say, who is this titan, who, in the forest, has by craft borne away my tender consort? O Chief of the Monkeys, to-day I shall dispatch him to the region of death."