Thus, in his distress, did Rama speak, and the monkey, Sugriva, with joined palms, weeping, his voice shaken with sobs, answered him, saying:—
"Indeed I do not know where that wicked titan dwells, nor his strength, nor the extent of his valour, nor the tribe to which that vile monster belongs, but, O Subduer of Your Foes, I beg you in all sincerity to master your grief.
"By mine efforts, I shall succeed in restoring Maithili to you! By slaying Ravana and his entire house and manifesting my personal courage to the uttermost, I shall act in such a way that you will be happy'ere long. You have yielded to despair sufficiently, now exhibit your native resolution! Men like you should not give way to despondency!
"I too suffer greatly on account of separation from my consort, but I do not despair like you, nor have I lost courage. Though but a common monkey, I do not indulge in complaint. How much less should you do so, O Magnanimous Hero, you who art wise, valiant and illustrious!
"You should resolutely restrain the tears that fall; it becomes you not to lose patience, that quality that distinguishes men of nobility.
"A brave man has recourse to reason and does not allow himself to be moved either in adversity, consequent on separation from relatives, or on the loss of possessions, or at the time of death. But the man who is lacking in courage and gives way to despair inevitably succumbs to his grief, like an overloaded ship in the water.
"Bowing low before you with joined palms, I beseech you to summon up all your fortitude and not yield to misery. Those who permit themselves to be overcome by grief never succeed, and their strength is decreased; do not therefore give thyself up to sorrow.
"He who is overwhelmed by despair is in danger. Banish your sorrow, O Indra among Men, and revive your courage; let it be fully restored! I speak to you for thine own good, as a friend; I do not wish to instruct you. Therefore for our friendship's sake, do not yield thyself up to grief."
Tenderly consoled by Sugriva, Rama wiped his face, which was wet with tears, with the corner of his tunic and, returning to his normal state as a result of Sugriva's words, the Lord Kakutstha, embracing him, said:—
"O Sugriva, you dost fulfil the role of a devoted friend, that of being of service with dignity. O Friend, see how, through your good counsel, I have become myself again. It is not easy to find such an ally, who is suffering the same adversity; therefore exert thyself to find Maithili and the cruel titan, that perverse Ravana, and tell me frankly what I should do. You are a rich field that the rains have visited; everything will succeed with you. Further, the words I recently pronounced1 with confidence, O Tiger among Monkeys, will without doubt come to pass. Never have I uttered a falsehood, nor shall I ever do so. I swear by the truth, that what I have said will come to pass!"
Hearing the words of that King of Men, the wise leader of the valiant monkeys felt in his heart that his purpose was accomplished.