"In my desire to make peace, I tried to placate my brother, who, returning, was incensed against me.
"I said:
'By the grace of the Gods, you are victorious and thine enemy has fallen under your blows; without you, I should be bereft of support, you are my only defender, O My Protector, My Delight! Now accept this royal canopy of many supports, resembling the full moon about to rise. Take also these chanvaras from my hands!
"'O King! For a whole year I waited sadly beside the cave and, seeing blood flowing to the entrance and stopping there, my heart was filled with anguish and my mind deeply troubled. I then dosed the opening of the cavern with a great rock and left that place to return to Kishkindha in deep distress. Seeing me, the people of that city and the ministers also placed me on the throne, without my desiring it. Therefore pardon me, you who art our Sovereign. I was invested with royal dignity in thine absence and thus preserved the city, its ministers and inhabitants, from anarchy. This kingdom has been as a trust to me; I now render it back to you, O Friend. Do not be wrath against me, O Destroyer of your Foes! Placing my head at your feet, O King, with joined palms, I appeal to you. It was on the insistence of the ministers and the united populace, that I was placed on the throne, they reflecting that the country would be seized by an enemy in the absence of a monarch.'
"To this humble speech, Bali answered with invectives, saying:—'Cursed be you!' and repeated the imprecation.
Then, gathering his subjects and ministers together, he inveighed against me, in the midst of my friends, reproaching me with bitter words, saying:—
"'Know well, that in anger the great Titan, Mayavi, one night challenged me to a long-desired combat. Hearing his voice, I left my royal dwelling and was followed immediately by my unscrupulous brother, who is present here. In the night, seeing me followed by another, that great titan fled terrified and both of us pursued him closely. In his haste to escape, he entered a great cave, and, seeing that vast and fearful cavern, I said to my false-hearted brother: 'I cannot return to the city till I have slain my rival; do you wait at the mouth of the pit till I have struck him down.' In the belief that he would remain there, I penetrated into that inaccessible cave.
"'While I was pursuing mine enemy, whose audacity rendered him truly formidable, a whole year elapsed, but at last I discovered him and slew him with his entire family. That titan, while being slain, roared aloud, and a stream of blood that spread all round, filled the cave, making it difficult to pass. Having happily slain my cruel adversary, I could not find the opening of the cave, the entrance having been closed. I called Sugriva again and again but there was no response and my situation was serious. By dint of kicking, I was able to roll back the rock and emerged, after which I returned to the city. That is why I am incensed against the wicked Sugriva, whose desire for the throne overcame his brotherly affection.'
"With these words, the monkey Bali, bereft of all sense of shame, chased me from the kingdom with but a single garment, having ill-treated me and carried off my consort, O Rama. Wretched and deprived of my companions, I took refuge on this lofty mountain, Rishyamuka, to which, for a particular reason, Bah has no access. This is the whole story of the origin of our intense hostility; I have not merited the great humiliation that has visited me, as you now seest, O Raghava. O You who art the dispeller of fear, do you take this dread of my brother from me and punish him in my name."
The virtuous prince, having heard the faithful Sugriva's narrative, smiling, answered him saying:—
"These arrows of mine, bright as the sun, never fail to reach their target and with their sharp points will strike down that evil Bali with force. As long as I do not behold this ravisher of your consort, this wretch of perverse practices will live, but not an instant longer.
"I see you to be plunged in an ocean of grief, as am I, and I shall aid you to traverse it; you shalt certainly regain thine erstwhile prosperity."
Hearing these words, that increased his joy and courage, Sugriva, in extreme delight, uttered the following memorable words.