Returning to Kishkindha, Bali's city, they all concealed themselves behind the trees in the dense forest. Glancing round on every side, the Friend of the Woods, the thicknecked Sugriva began to exhibit signs of extreme anger and, surrounded by his kinsmen, let out a loud roar, challenging his brother to fight. Shattering the firmament with his warcry which resembled a great thundercloud propelled by a high wind, that monkey, who was endowed with a leonine gait and resembled the rising sun, stepped forth.
Looking at Rama who was skilled in combat, Sugriva said to him:—"Behold Kishkindha, surrounded by its walls made of gold and a rampart of monkeys, that is bristling with instruments of war and from which innumerable banners stream. This is Bali's citadel. Now fulfil the promise formerly made to me of slaying him, O Hero, as the blessing of Spring visits the creepers."
At Sugriva's words, the virtuous Rama, the destroyer of his foes, answered:—"You are wearing that which will enable me to distinguish you, this garland of Gaja flowers, placed by Lakshmana round your neck! This creeper worn by you lends you the brilliance of the sky in which the sun is surrounded by stars, O Warrior. To-day, O Monkey, I will deliver you from the fear and hostility that Bali inspires in you. Point out thine adversary in the guise of a brother, O Sugriva! Till Bali is struck down in the forest, let him make merry, for when he crosses my path, he will not return alive. If he should do so, you will be justified in reproaching me for not honouring my word.
"In your presence, seven Sala trees were transfixed by me with a single arrow; rest assured that Bali will fall to-day on the field of battle under my shafts.
"No light word has ever passed my lips, even in adversity, nor ever shall, even were it to attain my purpose; therefore banish all anxiety.
"Like a field rendered fertile by the rains of Shatakratu, do you challenge Bali of the golden diadem. O Sugriva, raise a shout that will cause that monkey, proud of his victory, whom you were unable to subdue before, and who is bellicose by nature, to come forth. Those who deem themselves brave are not able to endure the war-cry of their foes, above all in the presence of women."
Hearing Rama's words, the golden-hued Sugriva let out a deafening roar, rending the skies.
Terrified by the clamour, the kine ran hither and thither, like noble women exposed to danger of hostile attack through the negligence of their loved ones, and the wild deer fled away like maddened war horses wounded in battle, whilst the birds fell to the ground like planets whose virtue is exhausted.
Then that son of Surya emitted a roar resembling thunder, confident of his strength and radiant with courage, like the ocean whose waves are lashed by a tempest.