Seeing her lord lying on the earth, pierced by that deathdealing arrow discharged by Rama, Tara, whose face resembled the moon, approaching him, embraced him. At the sight of Bali, who lay like an elephant wounded by an arrow, that monkey resembling a huge mountain or an uprooted tree, Tara poured out her heart, torn with grief, in lamentation:—
"O You who were full of valour in combat! O Hero! O Best of Monkeys! It is because of my recent importunities that you will not now speak to me! Rise, O Lion among Monkeys and rest on a comfortable couch! Those great monarchs, thine equals, do not sleep on the earth; or is the earth your cherished love, since even in dying you dost lie by her and scomest me?
"Without doubt, O Warrior, thanks to your great exploits, you have founded another and more glorious Kishkindha in heaven! The pleasures we once shared in the woods and in the fragrant bowers are henceforth at an end. I am bereft of all joy and hope and sunk in a sea of sorrow, since you, the King of Kings, art returning to the five elements. My heart must be made of stone, since, seeing you lying on the earth, grief does not cause it to break into a thousand pieces. You didst steal away Sugriva's consort and sent him into exile; it is the fruit of this double fault that you are now expiating, O Chief of the Monkeys!
"Intent on your welfare, I submitted to your senseless reproaches; I, who in the desire to be of service to you gave you nought but wise counsel, O Indra of Monkeys! Now, O Proud Lord, beguiled by their youthful and seductive beauty, you are moving the hearts of the Apsaras. It is irrevocable fate which this day has put an end to thine existence; you whom Sugriva could not vanquish hast resigned thyself to its power!
"Having without cause struck down Bali who was engaged in combat with another, though it is censurable, Kakutstha has no regrets. I who, till now, did not know distress, deprived of your support, at the height of misfortune, must pass my life as a widow. What will the fate of Angada be, the object of my tenderness, a valiant though youthful prince accustomed to pleasure, now at the mercy of his paternal uncle, who is filled with anger against us? Look long on your virtuous Sire, O My Beloved Son! Soon you shalt see him no more.
"And You, O comfort your son, give him counsel, embracing his brow before you departest on your last journey! Assuredly Rama has accomplished a great feat in striking you down, but he is guiltless, for all he did was to obey Sugriva. O Sugriva, rejoice, regain possession of Ruma and enjoy the kingdom without hindrance; your brother, thine adversary, is wounded unto death.
"But You, O My Beloved, why dost you not answer my complaint? See, your numerous and lovely wives surround you, O King of the Monkeys."
Hearing Tara's lamentations, those unfortunate women, placing Angada in their midst, emitted pitiful cries on every side. Then Tara spoke once again, saying:—
"How canst you abandon Angada, O You whose powerful arms are decorated with bracelets, and go forth on your last journey thus? It is not meet to abandon a son who possesses your virtues and is aimiable and handsome. If inadvertently I have offended you, O I.ong-armed Hero, then forgive me! O Chief of the Monkey Tribe, I lay my head at your feet."
Thus did Tara with the other queens lament bitterly at the side of her lord and that lady of matchless beauty resolved to die of hunger lying on the earth at Bah's side.