Hanuman, however, the Leader of the Monkeys, gently tried to console Tara, who was lying on the earth like a star fallen from the heavens, and said:—
"The fruits of all that is done under the impulse of virtue or vice must be plucked after death, whether they be good or evil. O Unhappy One, for whom dost you weep? O Unfortunate One, whom dost you bewail? For whose life, that bubble, should one mourn? Henceforth the youthful Angada should be the object of your solicitude, since he alone survives. From now on, you should concern thyself on his account and render him fitting service. You knowest well how uncertain is the future of all beings; therefore it is for you to perform noble deeds here, who art conversant with your duty and who art a stranger to common acts!
"He under whom hundreds and thousands of monkeys lived has now reached the uttermost bourne of his destiny, and since he fulfilled the injunctions laid down by the law and was distinguished for his impartiality, his liberality and his tolerance, he now dwells among the virtuous conquerors. Why should you mourn for him? O Irreproachable One, you have now become the protectress of all the leading monkeys, your son, and also this kingdom of the apes and bears. Little by little do you console these two (Sugriva and Angada) who are afflicted, and under your tutelage, O Fair Lady, let Angada rule the earth.
"To ensure the future and reflect on the present is the whole duty of a prince; it is so decreed by destiny. Angada should be installed as King of the Monkeys and be anointed. Seeing your son seated on the throne, your peace of mind will be restored."
Hearing these words, Tara, who was tom with grief on account of her lord, answered Hanuman, who stood at her side, saying
"I would rather cling to the body of this hero than a hundred sons like Angada. I am not able to govern the monkeys nor is he; such a duty devolves on his paternal uncle, Sugriva. O Hanuman, it is not for me to confer the kingdom on Angada; the true relative of the son in succession to his father is the uncle, who stands as a second father to him and not the mother, O Foremost of Monkeys. There is nought better for me in this world or in the next than to take refuge near the King of the Monkeys, my lord; it is fitting for me to share the bed of him who has fallen facing the foe."