The chief ministers encircled Sugriva, who was clad in dripping garments and overcome with grief. Approaching the illustrious Rama of imperishable exploits, he stood before him with joined palms like the Sages before the Grand-sire of the World.
Then Hanuman, the son of Maruta, who resembled a mountain of gold, his face shining like the rising sun, addressed him with profound reverence in the following words:—
"May it please you, O Kakutstha, to reinstate Sugriva in the vast and impregnable kingdom of his mighty ancestors. Be gracious unto him, O Lord, and permit him to return to his magnificent capital. May he regulate his affairs with the co-operation of his many friends.
"After the purificatory bath of perfumes and aromatic herbs of every kind, he will pay you homage and bestow gifts and garlands and precious gems, scents and herbs on you. You should enter this marvellous cave, carved out of the mountain, and unite these monkeys with a master, thus making them happy!"
Hearing Hanuman's words, Rama, that Destroyer of Hostile Warriors, answered him with wisdom and eloquence, saying:—
"Most beloved Hanuman, in accordance with the behests of my sire I may not enter a village or city for fourteen years. Let Sugriva, that Bull among Monkeys enter that prosperous and glorious city and be installed as king according to the traditional rites!"
Having spoken thus to Hanuman, Rama said to Sugriva:—"You who art conversant with your duty, proclaim that noble and valiant hero, Angada, heir-apparent to the kingdom. He is the eldest son of your elder brother and equal to him in courage; Angada has a valiant heart and deserves to be thine heir. It is now Shravana, the first month of the rainy season, that brings the floods; it is no time for military exploits therefore return to your capital. As for me, I shall live on the mountain with Lakshmana. This cavern, carved out of the rock, is large and airy and possesses a lake whose crystalline waters abound in lotuses of every kind. When the month of Kartika has come, make ready to slay Ravana, this is our pact; meantime, O Friend, return to thine home and receive the royal anointing, thus gratifying your friends."
Thus dismissed by Rama, Sugriva, that Bull among Monkeys penetrated into the enchanting city of Kishkindha of which Bali had been the supreme lord.
Following their sovereign, thousands of monkeys prostrated themselves, touching the dust with their foreheads, and Sugriva, full of valour, called on them to rise, addressing his subjects with affection.
That mighty warrior thereafter entered his brother's private apartments and, having come there, the powerful hero, Sugriva, that Bull of Forest-dwellers, was proclaimed king by his friends, as was formerly the God of a Thousand Eyes.
Then they brought him a white canopy, decorated with gold, and two magnificent whisks of yak's tails with gleaming golden handles, also gems of every kind and grain and grass, together with blossoming branches, flowers and rich stuffs, white unguents, fragrant garlands, wild flowers and those that grow in water, sacred sandalwood, varied and numerous perfumes, roasted grain, gold, panic seed, honey, butter, curds, a tiger skin and wonderfully wrought sandals.
Thereafter six lovely young girls, bringing scents, tallow and red and yellow pigments, entered joyfully and distributed gems, raiment and food among the foremost of the twice-born.
Those versed in the sacred formulas then prepared heaps of kusha grass and, igniting a fire, poured out the Soma, purified by the recitation of traditional prayers. Then Sugriva, seated on a gorgeous golden-based throne, covered with rich draperies and a magnificent three-tiered baldaquin, decorated with marvellous garlands, facing the East, was enthroned.
Those Lions among the Forest-dwellers had visited the banks of rivers and streams, far and wide, as well as the sacred places and the seas, in order to draw pure water which they brought back in pitchers of gold.
Employing golden vases and the polished horns of bulls, Gaja, Gavaksha, Gavaya, Sharabha, Gandhamadana, Mainda, Dvivida, Hanuman and Jambavan in accordance with the tradition laid down in the scriptures and on the instructions of the Sages, poured the clear and fragrant water over Sugriva, as formerly the Vasus bathed Vasava of a Thousand Eyes.
When the enthronement was completed, all those illustrious leaders of the monkeys raised a shout of joy again and again. Thereafter, in order to follow Rama's counsel, Sugriva, the King of the Monkeys, embracing Angada, installed him as heir-apparent.
Angada received the investiture, and those magnanimous Plavagas acclaimed him crying "Excellent! Excellent!", praising Sugriva and the great-souled Rama and Lakshmana. All were overjoyed on this auspicious occasion; a large and merry crowd, fully satisfied, filled the streets, carrying banners and standards in the enchanting city of Kishkindha, which had been hollowed out of the mountain.
Having informed the illustrious Rama of the great coronation ceremony and being reunited with his consort, Ruma, the heroic leader of the monkey army took possession of his kingdom, like the Chief of the Immortals.