Hanuman observed that the heavens had become serene, free from lightning or cloud, filled with the cry of cranes and marvellously illumined by the light of the moon.
Sugriva however, having attained his end, had become indifferent to his duty and proper responsibilities, allowing his mind to engage in lower pursuits. His ambitions fulfilled, he ceased to harbour any solicitude concerning his affairs and gave himself up to enjoyment with women, satisfying every capricious desire.
Having realised his hopes and his fears being allayed, he passed the time by day and by night with his favourite consort Ruma and also Tara who was equally dear to him, as the Lord of the Gods disports himself among the troops of nymphs and musicians. Leaving the administration of the state to his ministers without supervision, his realm not being in peril, he became a slave to sense pleasures.
Seeing this, the resourceful Hanuman, the eloquent son of Maruta, conversant with what ought to be done and knowing the appropriate time for the performance of duty, approaching the King of the Monkeys, who well understood what was placed before him, spoke to him with confidence, in well chosen words inspired by respect and affection, words that were pleasing, full of good sense, practical, true, salutary, in accord with the law and duty, expedient and diplomatic. Even such was the speech of Hanuman, which he addressed to the King of the Monkeys.
He said:—"You have recovered your throne and your glory and added to the prosperity of thine house; it now remains for you to concern thyself with your friends; this is your duty! He who, recognizing the fitting moment, conducts himself honourably towards his friends, sees the increase of his glory and his power.
"He who treats with equal regard, wealth, sceptre, friends and life itself, O Prince, acquires a vast empire. Let this be your conduct, establish thyself in the path of honour, this is what you should do for your friends in accordance with your vow.
"He who does not abandon everything in order to occupy himself with the interests of his friends, whatever his aim, enthusiasm or undertakings, is courting failure.
"In the same way, he who allows the occasion for coming to the assistance of his friends to pass is worthless, even if he achieve great things. We are losing this opportunity of serving the interests of our friend Raghava, O Vanquisher of Your Foes. Let us occupy ourselves with finding Vaidehi. Rama has not reminded you that the time appointed has gone by, though he is fully conversant with the hour; albeit hard pressed, that sagacious prince has graciously resigned himself, O King!
"It is to Raghava that you owest the prosperity of thine House, he wields immense influence, his power is immeasurable, his personal attributes incomparable. Render back the service he has done to you, O Chief of the Monkeys, call together the leaders of your people! The delay is not yet serious, as long as Rama does not call upon you to redeem your promise, but if you defer till he constrain you by force, it will be too late.
"Even had he done nought for you, it would be your duty to assist him in his quest, O Chief of Monkeys! How much more so after the service he has rendered you in re-establishing you on your throne and slaying Bali.
"You are powerful and your courage is extreme, O You who rulest the monkeys and the bears, therefore you are under a greater obligation to assist Rama.
"Without doubt the son of Dasaratha is able to overcome the Gods, the demons and the great serpents with his arrows, he is merely awaiting the fulfilment of your vow. It was not without risking his life that he bestowed such happiness on you. Let us scour the earth and, if need be, the sky, in search of Sita. Neither the Devas, Danavas, Gandharvas or Asuras accompanied by the hosts of Maruts, nor the Yakshas are able to make him tremble, much less the titans.
"It is imperative, O Prince of the Tawny-coloured Ones, that you should try to please Rama with thine whole soul, who is endowed with that power that formerly succoured you.
"We will not hesitate to enter the subterranean regions beneath the waters nor ascend into the sky if you commandest it, O King of the Monkeys! Do you decree who shall proceed and how and in what order. There are more than ten million monkeys of indomitable strength ready to serve you, O Irreproachable Prince!"
Hearing these apposite and reasonable words, Sugriva, in his rectitude, made a supreme decision.
Wisely commanding Nila of inexhaustible valour to gather the troops from every quarter, he said:—
"Do you muster mine entire army with its leaders and generals, whom none can resist, and bring them here immediately. The Plavagas who are stationed on the frontiers are skilled and brave, let them come here, see to it personally that I am instantly obeyed. He who does not present himself within fifteen days from now will be summarily executed, none shall escape.
"With Angada, seek out the veterans, carry out my orders scrupulously."
Having made all these arrangements, the Chief of the Monkeys, the valiant Sugriva, returned to his private apartments.