Sugriva re-entered his palace, and the sky being free from cloud, Rama, who, during the rainy season, had been overcome by the intensity of his grief, gazing on the pure and tranquil moon and the marvellously clear autumnal nights, perceiving that Sugriva was leading a life of pleasure and reflecting on his own loss, also that time was passing, fell into a profound melancholy.
Though he soon mastered his mood, yet the wise Raghava remained absorbed in the thought of Sita, and seeing the sky free from cloud taking on a serene aspect, re-echoing to the call of cranes, he began to lament in sorrowful accents. Seated on the jutting ridge of a mountain rich in gold, under the autumnal sky, his thoughts went out to his beloved spouse and he reflected:—
"What joy can my youthful wife experience now, she, who loved the call of the cranes in the forest and imitated their note? In mine absence, how can that tender maid take any delight in the tufts of flowers shining like pure gold, she, who formerly wakened to the cry of the swans? What felicity can Sita of soft speech and tender form enjoy now?
"When she hears the cry of the wild geese, travelling in skeins, what will become of that princess, whose eyes are as large as lotuses? I feel no happiness without Sita, whose eyes resembled the doe's, when wandering by river, lake and forest, and my beloved in her tenderness will suffer cruelly in mine absence, through the desire that the beauty of autumn inspires." Thus did that son of a King lament like unto the Saranga bird when it solicits water from Indra.
At that moment, Lakshmana, who had gone out in careful search of fruits, returned from the enchanting mountain slopes and perceiving his elder brother absorbed in sorrowful thoughts, his mind distraught, alone in that solitude, the sagacious Saumitri, who was deeply distressed by the grief of his unfortunate brother, said to him:—
"Why, O Noble Prince, hast you become a slave to love? Why this reversion of your former resolution? Your distress precludes you from reflecting calmly; tranquillity of mind is essential to carrying out any design; after mature consideration, the time ordained together with the strength of thine ally should be utilised by you for carrying out your project without delay, O Friend!
"Nay I The daughter of Janaka supported by you, will not be of easy access to the foe, O Protector of the Human Race. None may approach a blazing fire without being burnt, O Valiant Warrior!"
On this, Rama answered the indomitable Lakshmana in characteristic accents that were worthy of him, saying:—
"Your words are practical and wise, full of good sense and in accord with duty and the law. We should reflect on how to act without delay; this quest must be pursued; when one is powerful, invincible, youthful and valiant, one should have no misgivings concerning one's success."
Then recollecting Sita, whose eyes were as large as lotus petals, Rama with a downcast mien again addressed Lakshmana, saying:—
"The Thousand-eyed God, having saturated the earth with water and caused the grain to germinate, his task accomplished, is now resting. The clouds, which amidst a deep and prolonged rumbling spread over the mountains, forests and cities, letting loose their showers, are stationary, O Prince. The fury of the thunderclouds, resembling intoxicated elephants, black as the leaves of the blue lotus, darkening the ten regions has abated. Swollen with water, the clouds have visited the fragrant groves of Kutaja and Arjuna trees with wind and rain and have now disappeared in their airy flight, O My Friend. The clamour of the herds of elephants, the cry of the peacocks and the sound of the rain have ceased, O Irreproachable Lakshmana.
"Washed by dense clouds that have removed their impurities, the mountains with their magnificent escarpments shine forth illumined by the moon's rays.
"Autumn now manifests her grace in the branches of the Saptacchada trees, in the light of sun, moon and stars and in the gait of the majestic elephants, and her influence appears everywhere. In the tufts of lotuses opening to the first rays of the sun, in the scent of the Saptacchada flowers, in the music of the humming bees, autumn shines in all her splendour.
"The geese with their large and graceful wings, friends of the God of Love, have just arrived, covered with the pollen of the lotuses and are walking to and fro on the sandy banks of the rivers, disporting themselves with the swans.
"In the intoxicated elephants, in the kine, in the tranquilly flowing rivers, autumn is reflected in her myriad aspects. Seeing the sky bereft of cloud, the peacocks in the woods, shorn of their caudal beauty, are no longer attracted to their chosen ones and having lost their brilliance, their delight has evaporated and they appear absorbed in their own thoughts.
"The tall trees of sweet fragrance, the tips of whose branches are bent under the weight of their blossom, shining like gold, enchanting to look upon, seem to light up the depth of the forest.
"Accompanied by their females, the great elephants, frequenters of the pools covered with lotuses and the woods, who formerly stood amidst the flowers, intoxicated with ichor, now walk with a slow and languid pace, merged in amorous sport.
"The sky has cleared and is as bright as a drawn sword; the water in the river flows slowly; a breeze, refreshing the white water lilies, blows and those regions delivered from the darkness shine forth.
"Freed from mud by the growing warmth of the sun, the soil is covered with a thick dust that the wind carries to a great distance.
"It is the time when kings, at enmity with each other, start on their campaigns.
"Shining with beauty with which the autumn has endowed them, exulting, their limbs powdered with dust, mad with desire and thirsting to fight, the bulls bellow amidst the kine.
"Sharing his love, the noble she elephant, eager and affectionate, with a slow tread circles round the bull intoxicated with ichor and follows him in the woods.
"Bereft of their tail feathers, their marvellous natural adornment, wandering on the banks of the rivers, the peacocks, as if scorned by the cranes, move about forlornly, in flocks.
"With their formidable cries, the chief of the elephants strike terror in the ducks and geese standing in the pools covered with flowering lotuses and, having sprinkled themselves with water again and again, begin to drink.
"On the rivers, free of mud, with their sandy banks and peaceful ripples frequented by herds of kine, re-echoing to the cry of cranes, herons frolic joyously.
"The sound of the rivers, the clouds, the waterfalls, the winds, the cry of the peacocks and the croaking of frogs has ceased. Many coloured venomous serpents, greatly emaciated, deprived of food during the rains, tormented with hunger emerge from their holes where they have been confined so long.
"The evening, caressed by the rays of the trembling moon, casts aside her veil, revealing her roseate countenance with its stars, in an ecstasy of joy. The night, whose gentle face is the full moon, resembles a youthful woman, the clusters of stars her smile and charming mien; lit by the orb at its full it seems as if wrapped in a white mantle.
"Gorged with ripe grain, an enchanting flock of cranes joyfully crosses the sky in rapid flight, blown by the breeze like a garland of flowers tastefully interwoven.
"The waters of the great lake, with a solitary swan floating there asleep amidst countless waterlilies, resembles the heavens free from cloud, illumined by the full moon and a myriad stars. With their girdle of swans, their wreaths of blue and white lotus in flower, the great lakes are surpassingly beautiful and resemble lovely women decorated with jewels.
"At break of dawn, blending with the sound of the breeze blowing through the reeds, resembling the notes of a flute, the deep roarings in the caverns, increased by the wind and the bellowing of bulls, seem to answer one another.
"The river banks adorned with flowering grasses, stirred by a gentle breeze, resemble bright linen cloths from which the stains have been washed away.
"Bumble bees, roaming at will in the forest, gorged with nectar, heavy with the pollen of lotuses, where they have rested, in an excess of joy accompanied by their loved ones, follow the God of the Wind, in the woods.
"The calm waters, the flowering grasses, the cry of curlews, the ripened paddy fields, the gentle breeze, the immaculate moon, are all celebrating the departure of the rainy season.
"To-day the rivers, wearing their silver fish as girdles, flow by slowly, like lovely women, moving languidly, having passed the night in love.
"With the geese, aquatic plants and the reeds that cover them like woven shawls, the rivers, sparkling, resemble the feces of women.
"In the forest, adorned with arches of blossom and full of the joyous humming of bees, the God of Love, to-day, impatiently wields his fiery bow.
"Having saturated the earth with their profuse showers and filled the lakes and rivers, preparing the soil for the harvest, the clouds have disappeared from the sky.
"Little by little, the rivers in autumn uncover their banks, like chaste brides disclosing their charms.
"O My Friend, the waters having subsided, the rivers reecho to the cry of ospreys and flocks of geese abound in the ponds.
"It is the time, O Beloved Prince, when kings declare war on each other and thirsty for conquest enter upon their campaigns. The inception of hostilities for monarchs has begun, O Prince, and I do not see Sugriva making ready for an expedition of this kind.
"Asana, Saptaparna, Kovidara trees are in full flower as also the Bandhujiva plant and the Tamala trees on the mountain slopes.
"O Lakshmana! Behold the sandy banks of the rivers abound in swans, cranes, geese and osprey that are seen on every side. The four months of rain that have passed seemed to me like a hundred years, so filled with grief was I on account of Sita's absence.
"Like the Cakravaka bird with its mate, she followed me in the forest and the dreadful loneliness of the Dandaka solitudes seemed to that youthful woman a garden of delight. Though far from my beloved, overcome with sorrow, bereft of my kingdom and an exile, yet Sugriva shows no pity for me, O Lakshmana!
"'He is without support, deprived of his kingdom, affronted by Ravana, unhappy, exiled, that amorous prince has taken refuge with me.'
Thus will Sugriva speak, O My Friend, and in his perversity, he, the King of the Monkeys, holds me in contempt, I, the Scourge of My Foes. Having fixed a time to set out in search of Sita and entered into a formal contract to do so, this false one, having obtained his ends, has forgotten his pledge.
"Do you enter Kishkindha and in my name, address that Bull of the Monkeys, the wretched Sugriva, the slave of domestic bliss, saying:—
'He who, having raised the hopes of those who have sought his help in adversity and who formerly rendered him a service, fails to fulfil his promise to them, is considered the least of men in this world but that valiant one, who for good or evil loyally honours his given word, he is the best of men.
"'Even the carnivorous beasts refuse to feed on the flesh of those ungrateful beings, who, having obtained their end, do not assist their friends to do so in their turn.
"'Assuredly you desirest to behold the gleam of my gold backed bow, resembling a series of lightning flashes, stretched ready for combat. Then shalt you hear the dread twanging of my bowstring like unto the clash of thunder, when in wrath, I range the field of battle.'
"Having brought my renowned valour to his remembrance, O Illustrious Prince, you, who art my companion, it would be strange if he did not pause and reflect. O You Conqueror of Hostile Cities, since he, the King of the Plavagas, has gained his desire, he no longer recollects the time chosen, and the King of the Monkeys, wholly given over to pleasure, does not appear to be aware that four months have passed. Drinking and roystering with his ministers and his court, Sugriva does not trouble himself about us, who are filled with anxiety.
"Go and address him, O Valiant Hero, inform him of our displeasure and speak to him in those terms, which are inspired by my wrath, saying:—
'The Gate of Death, through which Bali passed, is not closed! O Sugriva, honour your pledge, for fear that you mayest follow in the path taken by him!'
Your brother died alone, struck down by mine arrow but if you failest in faith, I shall destroy you together with thine whole House.'
"O Greatest of Men, say all that will further our desire, we must not delay, O Prince. Say to him
'Honour the promise you didst make to me, O King of the Monkeys, recollect that virtue is eternal or, losing your life this day, you shalt fall into the jaws of death, where my shafts shall despatch you to seek out Bali!'"
Seeing his elder brother, who was afflicted in his great misfortune, in the throes of violent anger, Lakshmana, burning with courage, the promoter of the glory of Manu's Race, profoundly distressed, felt a deep resentment towards the King of the Monkeys.