Seeing that indomitable lion among men, Lakshmana, entering full of wrath, Sugriva was troubled and, observing that Son of Dasaratha breathing heavily and burning with indignation on account of the calamity that had overtaken his brother, the King of the Monkeys rose and, leaving his golden seat that resembled the highly decorated standard of Indra, his eyes inflamed, approached Prince Lakshmana and stood before him like the mighty Kalpa tree. Thereupon the women, lead by Ruma, followed him, like a cluster of stars surrounding the moon.
Then Lakshmana, filled with ire, said to Sugriva standing amidst the women with Ruma at his side, like the moon surrounded by stars:—
"That king who is endowed with great and noble qualities and is compassionate, who has subdued his senses and is grateful and loyal, obtains renown in the world, but the monarch who is rooted in unrighteousness and is unjust to his friends who have rendered him assistance, is the object of opprobrium.
"To utter a falsehood with reference to a horse is to be guilty of the death of a hundred horses, in regard to a cow of a thousand cows, but to utter a falsehood in regard to a man is to destroy one's self as well as one's kindred.
"That ungrateful wretch, who, having gained his end, does not render service for service, is guilty of the murder of all beings, O King of the Plavagas; this is the text recited by Brahma on beholding one who was guilty of ingratitude; it is known throughout the world, O Plavamgama. He who kills a cow or drinks intoxicating liquor or is a thief or violates his vow is still able to expiate his sin, but for him who is guilty of ingratitude, no expiation is possible.
"You are an ignoble, false and ungrateful wretch, O Monkey, for having obtained what you didst seek from Rama without requiting his services. Having achieved your desire through Rama, is it not your duty to do everything in your power to recover Sita? Yielding thyself up to sensual delights, untrue to your promise, Rama does not know you for the serpent croaking like a frog, that you are.
"In his compassion for you, O Wicked Wretch, the magnanimous Rama enabled you to regain the kingdom of the monkeys. You have failed to acknowledge the benefits conferred on you by the high-souled Raghava, therefore pierced by sharp arrows you shalt follow Bali. The path your brother took at death is not yet closed! Honour your promise, O Sugriva, do not follow in his wake. Since you dost not behold the Prince of the Ikshvakus loosing his fiery shafts, you are still able to remain serene and happy, without concerning thyself about his anxieties."