By nature gentle, Lakshmana listened to those just and gracious words of Tara with deference.
Perceiving the magnanimous acceptance of her speech, the King of the Monkeys threw off his fear as one discards wet clothing. Thereafter Sugriva tore off the gaudy and variegated garland from his neck and threw it away, his intoxication being dissipated and that Chief of the Monkeys addressed the redoubtable warrior Lakshmana with humility, thus gratifying him, and said:—
"O Saumitri, I had lost my fortune, my fame and the kingdom of the monkeys which by Rama's favour have been wholly restored to me. Who is able to equal this or render it back even in part to that divine Rama, renowned for his exploits, O Prince? The virtuous Raghava will recover Sita and slay Ravana by his own valour alone; as for me, I shall merely accompany him. What need of assistance has he who, with a single arrow pierced seven giant trees and a mountain, penetrating deep into the earth? He by the sound of whose stretching bow the earth with its mountains quakes, what need has he for aid? I shall follow that Indra among Men, O Lakshmana, when he goes forth to destroy his adversary, Ravana, together with his House.
"If I have betrayed his friendship or confidence in some measure, may he pardon me; is there any without fault?"
These words of the magnanimous Sugriva pleased Lakshmana who addressed him affectionately, saying:—
"Assuredly my brother will not lack support, O Prince of the Monkeys, above all, O Sugriva, with your co-operation, who art full of humility. Such is your valour and sincerity, that you are worthy of enjoying the unequalled prosperity of the monkey realm.
"With thine aid, undoubtedly, O Sugriva, the illustrious Rama will soon slay his enemies in battle. Virtuous, mindful of what should be done, intrepid in the field, you utter noble words that are worthy of you, O Friend. Who else, recognizing his fault, at the height of his power, would speak thus, O Bull among the Monkeys, save mine elder brother and you?
"You are equal to Rama in courage and strength! You has been ordained his ally by the Gods, O Chief of the Monkeys. Why delay further, O Hero, let us go forth together and offer consolation to your friend, who is afflicted on account of separation from his consort.
"O Sugriva, forgive those reproaches that I addressed to you on account of Rama's profound distress."