Sugriva disclosed his plan to Hanuman in particular, being supremely confident that this leader, the foremost of monkeys, would accomplish his purpose.
Then the monkey king, the lord of all the dwellers in the woods, well pleased, addressed the son of the Wind-God, the peerless Hanuman, saying:—"Nowhere on the earth, in the air or sky, in the celestial regions or in the depths of the sea, do I know of any obstacle that can impede your course, O Best of Monkeys! All the worlds with the Asuras, Gandharvas, Nagas, Men and Gods, as well as the mountains and the seas are well known to you. In motion, speed, skill and energy you are the equal of your sire, O Valiant One, and there exists no creature on this earth that is like you in vigour, O Hero of infinite resource! Reflect therefore on how Sita may be found I In you, O Hanuman, repose strength, wit, courage and policy in conjunction with the knowledge of time and place."
Realizing that success in the venture depended on Hanuman and that Hanuman himself was chosen on account of his exploits, Rama reflected: "This Lord of the Monkeys has supreme confidence in Hanuman and Hanuman too is sure of success; he who has been tested by his deeds and who is considered worthiest by his master is certain to accomplish his purpose."
Thereupon that mighty warrior, Rama, considering that his ends were already gained, felt a great felicity flooding his mind and heart and that scourge of his enemies, highly gratified, gave Hanuman a ring inscribed with his name that would be a sign to the princess and said to him:—
"O Foremost of Monkeys, by this token, the daughter of Janaka will not fail to recognize you as my messenger. O Warrior, your resolution, your courage and thine experience as also Sugriva's words seem to me to predict success."
Thereupon, taking the ring and placing it to his forehead, that foremost of monkeys, offering obeisance to the feet of Rama, prepared to depart. Taking with him a mighty band of monkeys, that hero, the son of Pavana, resembling the moon in a cloudless sky encircled by stars, set forth.
And Rama addressed that mighty warrior saying:—"O You endowed with the strength of a lion, I depend on your valour; by summoning up your great resources, do all in your power, O Son of the Wind, O Hanuman, to bring back the daughter of Janaka."