Summoning all the monkeys, the Lord of the Apes, Sugriva, spoke to them touching the success of Rama's enterprise, and said:—
"O Chiefs of the Monkeys, knowing my commands, go forth and search those regions indicated by me." Whereupon, covering the earth like locusts, the army started out. During the month fixed for the search for Sita, Rama and Lakshmana remained on the mountain Prasravana.
The valiant Shatavali set out with all speed for the north, that marvellous region where the monarch of the mountain rises whilst the leader of the monkey bands, Vinata, went towards the east. Tara, Angada and others, in company with that monkey born of Pavana, marched towards the southern region inhabited by Agastya; and Sushena, that lion among monkeys, went to the west, that fearful region protected by Varuna.
Having despatched the generals of his forces to each of the quarters, that king of the monkey hosts experienced supreme satisfaction.
Under the orders of their sovereign, all the monkey leaders departed in great haste, each in the direction assigned to him and, full of valour, those monkeys shouted, cheered, howled and chattered, rushing on and on amidst a great uproar. Having listened to the instructions of their monarch, the leaders of these monkeys cried: "We shall bring Sita back and slay Ravana". Some said: "I alone shall defeat Ravana in open combat and having laid him low, shall deliver the daughter of Janaka, still trembling with fear, saying to her 'Rest here, you are weary Others said: "Singlehanded I shall recover Janaki even if it be from the depth of hell; I shall uproot the trees, cleave the mountains, penetrate the earth and chum up the ocean." One said, "Without doubt I can clear four miles in one bound!" and another, "I can clear a hundred," and yet another, "I am able to leap more than a hundred. Neither on earth, in the sky nor on the sea nor mountains nor in forests, not even in the nether regions can anything bar my progress".
Thus in turn did the monkeys, proud of their strength, speak in the presence of their king.