The leaders of the monkeys having departed, Rama enquired of Sugriva saying:—"How is it that you knowest all the quarters of the earth?"
Then Sugriva, bowing low, said to Rama: "Hear me and I will tell you all.
"When Bali pursued the giant Dundubhi, in the form of a buffalo, in the direction of the Malaya mountain, Mahisha entered a cave in that mountain and Bali, desirous of slaying that Asura, followed him.
"I remained obediently at the entrance of the cave, but a whole year passed and Bali did not re-emerge. Then the cavern was filled with foaming blood which gushed forth, and seeing this, I was terrified and consumed with a burning grief on account of my brother. Distracted, I reflected: 'My elder brother is certainly dead' and I placed a rock, as large as a hill, at the mouth of the cave, thinking 'The buffalo will not be able to come out and will die'; after which I returned to Kishkindha giving up all hope of Bali being alive.
"There obtaining the mighty kingdom with Tara and Ruma, surrounded by my friends, I began to pass my days in peace.
"That bull among monkeys, however, having slain Dundubhi returned, and trembling with fear, in all humility, I made over the crown to him.
"That wicked wretch, however, beside himself with rage, wishing to slay me, followed me whilst I sought to fly with my ministers. It was then that, hotly pursued by him, I passed by various streams, forests and cities. The earth appeared to me like the reflection of a whirling firebrand seen in a mirror or a puddle.
"Journeying towards the eastern region, I beheld many kinds of trees, beautiful mountains, charming caverns and lakes. I saw the Udaya Mountain rich in gold and the white sea, the abode of Apsaras. Pursued by Bali, flying on and on, O Lord, I turned and continued my course then, changing my direction once more, I made for the south, covered by the Vindhya Forest and embellished with sandal wood trees. Thereafter, seeing Bali among the woods, on the mountains, I went westwards still followed by him.
"It is thus that I grew conversant with every kind of region and finally reached the Astachala Mountains. Beyond that most beautiful and elevated of ranges I turned to the north and passed Himavat, Meru and the Northern Sea.
"Unable to find refuge from Bali, the sagacious Hanuman said to me:—'O King, I recollect now that the Lord of the Monkeys was formerly cursed by the Sage Matanga in this very hermitage. If he should enter this asylum, his head will be split into a hundred pieces; we can, therefore, take up our abode here without anxiety.'
"O Son of a King, I, thereupon, went to the Rishyamuka Mountain, nor did Bali dare to come there for fear of the Sage Matanga. This is how, O King, I visited every part of the world and took refuge in this cave."