Then the eminently wise Angada addressed all the monkeys and, though himself fatigued, exhorted them to take courage, saying:
"We have searched the forests, mountains, rivers and impenetrable wilds, valleys and caverns with care, without finding the daughter of Janaka, Sita, or that wicked wretch, the titan, who bore her away. A great part of the time assigned to us by Sugriva, whose commands are inexorable, has elapsed; therefore, banishing languor, despondency, torpor and fatigue, together let us examine every region once again. Search in such a way that Sita may be discovered by us. Perseverance, ability and ardour are said to conduce to success; I therefore address you thus:—O Dwellers in the Woods, explore the whole inaccessible forest to-day without counting the cost, success will wholly depend on your exertions; to permit yourselves to be overcome by fatigue or give way to sleep is not fitting. Sugriva is irascible and inflicts harsh punishments; he is ever to be feared, as also the magnanimous Rama. I speak in your own interests; therefore, if you concur, act accordingly or let someone point out what alternative will benefit us all, O Monkeys."
Hearing Angada's words, Gandhamadana, though faint from thirst and fatigue, spoke in clear accents, saying:—"That which Angada has said is worthy of him and is appropriate and timely, let us act upon it! Let us search the hills, caves, rocks, desert places and waterfalls, in accord with the instructions given by Sugriva; let us scour the forest and the mountain ridges together!"
Then the monkeys, rising, full of valour, began to range the south covered by the Vindhya forests, afresh. Scaling the mountain that resembled an autumnal cloud, rich in silver, with its innumerable peaks and valleys, those foremost of monkeys, eager to find Sita, ranged the enchanting Lodhra forests and the woods of Saptaparna trees. Ascending to the summit of the mountain, though endued with immense energy, they were overcome with fatigue, yet they did not see Vaidehi, the beloved consort of Rama, anywhere. Having surveyed that hill with its innumerable ravines, as far as eye could see, the monkeys looking on every side, descended and, reaching the base, harassed and beside themselves, halted for an instant under a tree; then finding themselves less fatigued, they prepared to explore the southern region again.
Thereafter the chiefs of the monkeys, with Hanuman at their head, began to range the Vindhya hills once more.