Hearing Hanuman's speech uttered with humility, filled with wisdom and justice and reflecting honour on Sugriva, Angada answered him saying:—
"Stability, purity of mind and disposition, compassion, rectitude, daring and perseverance are unknown to Sugriva. He who, while her son was living, united himself to the beloved queen of his elder brother, on whom he should rightfully have looked as a mother, is to be condemned. What does he know of morality who, while his brother was in the grip of an Asura, closed up the opening of the cave? What gratitude will he manifest who, having clasped his hand in friendship, forgot the favours received from his great benefactor, Raghava, of imperishable deeds? Where is righteousness in one who directed us to search for Sita here, not from fear of disloyalty but of Lakshmana? Who would trust that fickle, impious and ungrateful wretch, more especially those sprung from his own race? Whether he be possessed of good qualities or no, having established me in the kingdom, will he suffer the son of his enemy to live? How can I, whose counsels have been disclosed, who have been found guilty, who am powerless, poor and weak, expect to survive if I repair to Kishkindha? In his desire to retain the throne, Sugriva, who is wily, cunning and cruel, will assuredly place me in chains. For me death through fasting is preferable to being tortured and confined. Let all the monkeys abandon me here and return home. I vow I shall never reenter the city but shall stay here and fast to the end; death is better for me.
"Bowing to the king and also to the mighty Raghava, enquire after their welfare for me and bring news of my health and state to my adopted mother Ruma. To Tara, my real mother, offer consolation, for she is compassionate and pious and naturally full of love for her son. When she learns of my death, she will certainly yield up her life."
Having said this, Angada, making obeisance to the elders, his countenance woe-begone, weeping, spreading out some kusha grass sat down on the ground; as he sat there, those foremost of monkeys groaned, burning tears falling from their eyes. Thereupon surrounding Angada, condemning Sugriva and praising Bali, those monkeys resolved to starve themselves to death and, seating themselves on the seashore on heaps of darbha grass, pointing towards the south, those excellent monkeys sipping water, facing the east, resolved to die, saying:—"This is better for us 1"
As they spoke of the exile of Rama, the death of Dasaratha, the carnage in Janasthana, the slaying of Jatayu, the abduction of Vaidehi, the killing of Bali and the wrath of Raghava, those monkeys were filled with fear; and while those innumerable monkeys, resembling the peaks of mountains sat there, the whole region with its torrents and caverns resounded with their lamentations like the roll of thunder in the skies.