Having listened to Angada's words, those Chiefs of Monkeys, each in turn, began to dilate on what he was able to accomplish—Gaya, Gavaksha, Gavaya, Sharabha, Gandhamadana, Mainda, Dvivida and Angada as also Jambavan. Gaya speaking first, said:—
"I can leap a hundred miles!" and Gavaksha said:—"I can leap two hundred!" Then the monkey Sharabha said to his companions:—"I am able to leap three hundred miles, O Monkeys!" thereafter Rishabha said, "I can undoubtedly cross over four hundred miles!" and the mighty Gandhamadana said "I can leap five hundred miles!" In his turn the monkey, Mainda, said "And I, six hundred miles" and the illustrious Dvivida "Without difficulty I can leap over seven hundred miles!" Then Sushena, full of energy, the best of monkeys said, "I declare that I can leap eight hundred miles!"
And as they were speaking thus, the oldest of them, Jambavan, offering salutations to them all, spoke in this wise:—"Formerly I, also, had the power of motion but now I am advanced in years. Nevertheless in the present situation, nothing should be overlooked to assure the success of both Rama's and the King of Monkeys' mission: I shall therefore leap three hundred miles. There is no doubt whatever about this." Then Jambavan, addressing all those monkeys, added: "Alas! I have assuredly not the strength for that! Of old, I circumambulated the eternal Vishnu when he covered the world in three strides at the sacrifice of Virocana's son; now, however, I am old and tire quickly. When I was young, my energy was great and unmatched; today, I can only go as far as I have told you, which is not sufficient to bring success to our undertaking."
Thereupon the sagacious Angada, bowing to that mighty monkey, addressed him in pregnant words, saying: "I am able to leap these four hundred miles easily but should I be able to return? Nothing is certain I"
Thereat Jambavan answered that excellent monkey and said: "O Foremost of Monkeys, your power of motion is well known, but art you able to cross over eight hundred miles? It is not fitting that you should do so. My Dear Son, the master must in no way be commanded by his servants; it is for you to order this expedition. You are our leader and our only good. The head of the army is, as it were, the wife, who should constantly be protected; this is your role, O Dear Child. One should take care of the root of a thing, this is the practice of men of experience; the root being sound, the juices that have for their purpose the maturing of the fruit will be safeguarded. You are the essential part of this undertaking and, O Subduer of Your Foes, you, furnished with wisdom and valour, art the principle underlying it. You are our superior and the son of our superior, O Excellent One; with your support we shall be able to accomplish our mission."
Thus, in his great wisdom, Jambavan spoke and that mighty monkey born of Bali, Angada, answered him saying:—
"If I do not go nor any among these powerful monkeys does so, then undoubtedly we must begin our supreme fast once more, for if we return without having fulfilled the commands of that lord of the monkeys, then I do not see how we can hope to preserve our lives. Whether he show clemency or wrath, he is the chief of the monkeys and to disregard his will means death. In this matter no other alternative is possible; therefore it is for you who are able to see clearly to reflect upon it."
Thus spoke Angada and that powerful and heroic monkey, Jambavan, answered him in felicitous words saying:—
"O Warrior, this mission will be carried out without obstruction! I will call on the one who is able to accomplish it."
Thereupon that heroic monkey sent for the foremost of the apes, Hanuman, who was sitting tranquilly apart.