Then that Scourge of His Foes, Hanuman, prepared to follow the path of the Caranas in quest of the place to which Sita had been borne away by Ravana.
Desirous of accomplishing this difficult feat without hindrance, impossible to any other, that powerful monkey, stretching out his head and neck like a bull, frightening the birds, uprooting the trees with his breast and destroying innumerable creatures, like a lion overflowing with energy joyfully bounded over the grassy slopes resembling the sea.
On that mountain plateau, frequented by the Chiefs of the Serpent Race, embellished by blue, red, yellow, rose and various coloured metals, thronged with Celestial Beings, Yakshas, Kinneras and Gandharvas, able to change their form at will, that foremost of monkeys stood like a Naga in a lake.
Then, having paid homage to the Sun-god, Mahendra, Pavana, Svyambhu and all beings, he prepared to set out on his journey. Turning towards the east and saluting his sire, the resourceful Hanuman, having resolved to cross the ocean to fulfil Rama's purpose, in order to reach the southern region, expanded his body under the eyes of the leaders of the monkeys, as the sea increases under the full moon.
Assuming an immense stature, desirous of traversing the ocean, he pressed the mountain with his hands and feet and that immoveable peak shook under his weight and all the blossom from the tops of the trees fell in a shower wholly covering it with a mass of fragrant blooms.
Under the extreme pressure of that monkey's weight, water gushed forth from the mountain like ichor from the temples of an elephant in rut. Trampled underfoot by that mighty forest dweller, the mountain let loose innumerable streams of gold, silver and collyrium and, from that rocky mass, enormous boulders detached themselves containing red arsenic so that it resembled a brazier wreathed in smoke.
Crushed on every side by the monkey, those creatures, dwelling in the caverns, bruised and stifled, emitted strange cries and the formidable clamour created by them filled the whole earth and other regions.
Great serpents, rearing their distinctive hoods, vomited fire and bit the rocks with their fangs and those great crags, split by the venom, broke into flames and were shivered into a thousand fragments. The medicinal herbs also, which grew there, were affected by the poison which they were unable to neutralise.
Then the ascetics, terrified, reflecting that the mountain was being riven by great Beings, fled away, as well as the Vidya-dharas with their attendant women. Forsaking their golden seats, goblets and precious vessels with the ewers of gold in the feasting hall; abandoning the priceless sauces, wines and viands of every kind and the hides and swords with guards of Kanaka gold; intoxicated, their necks encircled with jewelled chains, adorned with garlands and red sandal paste, their eyes resembling blue lotuses, they rose into the air; and those fair Ones, wearing strings of pearls, rings and bracelets, startled, ascended smiling into the sky, close to their loved ones.
Witnessing this great marvel, Maharishis and Vidyadharas stood in the firmament gazing down on the mountain and they heard those pure-minded ascetics saying: "This Hanuman, born of the Wind, endued with great energy, desirous of crossing the ocean, the abode of Varuna, in order to carry out Rama's purpose and that of the monkeys, is eager to reach the further shore, a most difficult feat."
Hearing the words of the ascetics, the Vidyadharas beheld that foremost of monkeys on the mountain, bristling and quivering like a flame, emitting a great roar like the rumble of thunder. Then raising his tail which twitched convulsively, like a snake shaken by an eagle, he waved it to and fro and, lying curled across his back, it resembled a great serpent borne away by Garuda.
And that monkey, stiffening his arms like unto two immense clubs, girded up his limbs and, crouching down, contracted his neck and arms, summoning up all his strength and courage. Scanning the path he was to take and examining the distance to be covered, he drew in his breath, pressing his two feet firmly on the ground and that elephant among monkeys, Hanuman, flattening his ears, leapt forward and, full of energy, addressed the forest dwellers, saying:
"As an arrow loosed by Raghava flies with the speed of the wind so shall I course to Lanka which is guarded by Ravana. If I fail to find the daughter of Janaka there, I shall repair with the same speed to the region of the Gods, where, if despite mine efforts I do not recover Sita, I shall bring back the King of the Titans in chains. Either, achieving success, I shall return or uprooting Lanka from its foundation, I shall bear it hither, together with Ravana."
With these words, Hanuman, the foremost of monkeys, without pausing for breath, deeming himself to be a second Suparna, sprang into the air and, such was the force of his leap, that the trees growing on the mountain, tossing their branches, were sent spinning on every side.
In his rapid flight, Hanuman bore away those trees with their flowering boughs filled with lapwings intoxicated with love, into the empyrean. Carried away by the impetus of his tremendous bound, those trees followed in his wake, like relatives accompanying their dear one setting out on a journey to a far country. Uprooted by the force of his motion, Sala and other forest trees followed in Hanuman's wake, like an army its leader. Surrounded by countless trees, the crests of which were laden with blossom, the monkey Hanuman, resembling a glorious mountain, was wonderful to behold. And those great trees, full of sap, fell into the sea, as formerly the mountains in fear of Indra plunged into Varuna's abode.
Covered with flowers of every kind, as well as young shoots and buds, that monkey shone like a cloud or a hill aglow with fireflies. Tom away by his leaping, those trees, scattering their blossom here and there, plunged into the sea, like friends who, having escorted one of their company, return. Borne away in their fragility by the wind produced by the monkey's impetuous flight, which had detached them from their stems, the multicoloured flowers fell into the sea.
Covered with a drift: of fragrant blooms of diverse tints, that monkey, in his flight, resembled a mass of clouds embellished by lightning and the waters strewn with the blossom of his leap, looked like the firmament when the enchanting stars appear. His two arms outstretched in space, resembled two five-headed serpents issuing from the summit of a mountain.
Sometimes that mighty monkey seemed to be drinking up the ocean with the multitudinous waves and sometimes it seemed as if he would swallow the sky itself. As he thus followed the wind's path, his eyes, shining like lightning, sparkled like two fires that have been kindled on a mountain.
The eyes of that tawny-hued one resembled the sun and moon in juxtaposition, and his coppery nose lent his countenance the same hue as the solar orb at the approach of dusk; his uplifted tail caused that offspring of the wind to appear like the raised banner of Indra. With his coiled tail and white teeth, that exceedingly sagacious son of Anila, Hanuman, shone like the star of day encircled by a halo of rays and his plump form, of a coppery hue, caused him to resemble a mountain which is being excavated for its deposits of red ochre. Bounding over the waters, the air imprisoned in the armpits of that leonine monkey, emitted a sound like thunder.
As in space, a meteor from a higher region rushes through the skies so did that elephant of monkeys appear or like a great bird soaring into the air or a great tusker tightly-bound by a girth, whilst the reflection of his body cast on the deep resembled a vessel foundering in a storm.
Wherever that great monkey passed, the sea rose tumultuously under the force of his bounds and, rushing on with extreme speed, with his breast like a great prow, he caused the salty sea to surge mountainously. Pushing those high heaving billows before him, that lion among monkeys seemed to be separating heaven and earth; the waves that rose up resembled Mount Meru and Mandara and, breasted by him in his impetuous course, the waters lashed by his speed, overspread the sky like autumnal clouds. Whales, crocodiles, huge fish and turtles were uncovered in turn, like the limbs of one shedding his attire, and sea serpents, beholding that lion among monkeys travelling through space took him to be Suparna himself.
The shadow of that great monkey, forty miles in extent and thirty wide, grew larger in the rapidity of his flight and, resembling a mass of white clouds, falling on the salty waters, looked exceedingly beautiful. That supremely illustrious and mighty monkey of vast body appeared like a winged mountain as he followed his aerial path without rest.
Wherever that mighty elephant among the monkeys passed, the sea was instantly transformed into a fountain and, following the path of the birds, Hanuman, like the King of the feathered tribe, thrust aside the massed clouds like the Wind-god himself. Great clouds, red, blue, pale or dark, scattered by the monkey's flight, looked exceedingly beautiful and he, now entering into them, sometimes hidden sometimes visible, resembled the moon.
Seeing that Plavaga coursing with such speed, the Gods, Gandharvas and Danavas began to rain flowers on him and, as he sailed on, the sun refrained from tormenting him and the wind ministered to him for the sake of Rama's enterprise.
Then the Rishis praised that dweller of the woods as he was coursing through the sky and the Gods and Gandharvas extolled him in song. Seeing him bounding in space, Nagas, Yakshas and Rakshasas of various races lauded that excellent monkey and the ocean, ever solicitous for the honour of the House of Ikshvaku, reflected:—"If I do not lend assistance to this Lord of Monkeys, I shall be an object of obloquy to all those gifted with speech; was I not reared by Sagara, the foremost of the race of Ikshvaku? This monkey is their counsellor, it is therefore incumbent on me not to let him perish in the waves. It behoves me to act in such wise that he may rest and, thus relieved by me, he will happily traverse the remaining way."
In this magnanimous thought, the sea addressed that most excellent of mountains, the golden-hued Mainaka, which was covered by waves, saying:—
"You have been placed here by the King of the Celestials, as a rampart against the Asuras inhabiting the nether regions. Their power is well known and, lest they rise up anew from that hell of immeasurable dimensions, you are here to prevent their escape. Nevertheless you are able to move upwards and downwards and from side to side. I command you, therefore, O Best of Mountains, to rise up. That lion among monkeys, performer of mighty exploits, engaged in Rama's service, overcome with fatigue is passing over you; you are witness of his exertions, now lift thyself up!"
Hearing the Ocean's words, the golden-breasted Mountain Mainaka with its tall trees and creepers, instantly rose from its watery bed and, as the sun with its burning rays divides the cloud, that great mountain, which the waters had concealed, on Sagara's request, exposed its golden peaks inhabited by Kinneras and great serpents, shimmering like the sun at dawn, as if it were licking the skies. The summits of that high mountain, shining like a sword, possessed the brilliance of gold and its gilded crests emitted a dazzling light lending it the lustre of a thousand suns.
Beholding that mountain suddenly emerge before him from the middle of the sea, Hanuman reflected: 'This is an obstacle', and that mighty and impetuous monkey crushed that stony mass with his breast as the wind scatters the clouds; then that foremost of mountains, recognizing the power of Hanuman, shouted for joy. Thereupon, assuming the form of a man, stationing himself on his own summit, with a glad heart he addressed Hanuman saying:—
"O Most Excellent of Forest Dwellers, you have undertaken an arduous task, take thine ease on my crest and continue without fatigue. The ocean king was born in the House of Raghu and, seeing you engaged on Rama's behalf, offers obeisance to you. To render service for service is the divine decree. Desirous of serving Raghu's race, he is worthy of your consideration.
To do you honour, the Sea God adjured me thus:—
"'Traversing a hundred yojanas through the air, this monkey is worn out by his exertions, let him rest awhile on your summit and continue his way without fatigue.'
Do you therefore remain here, O Best of Monkeys and repose thyself. Having feasted on these many sweet and fragrant fruits and roots, proceed on your course at your leisure. O Foremost of Monkeys, the sum of your virtues is well-known in the Three Worlds. O Son of the Wind, of all the Plavagas who abound in energy, I esteem you to be the chief, O Lion among Monkeys! Even an ordinary man is honoured as a guest by one conversant with his duty, how much more one such as you? You are the Son of Maruta, the Foremost of the Celestials and dost equal him in speed, O Best of Monkeys! In honouring you, who art conversant with virtue, one is honouring your sire, therefore you dost merit my reverence. Hearken, there is a further reason for this:
"In olden times, Dear Child, the mountains, endowed with wings, began to range the four quarters with the speed of Garuda, and journeying thus, the companies of Celestials, ascetics and other Beings trembled with fear lest they should fall. Then, highly enraged, the God of a Thousand Eyes, the performer of an hundred sacrifices severed the wings of those hundreds and thousands of mountains with his thunderbolt.
"When, full of wrath, the Lord of the Celestials approached me, brandishing his mace, I was suddenly swept away by that high-souled Wind-god. O Foremost of Monkeys, I was thus cast into the salty waves and, retaining my wings, was preserved unhurt by thine ancestor. On account of this, you are an object of adoration to me and this is the powerful bond which unites us, O Chief of the Monkeys. The time for honouring the benefit conferred having come, it behoves you to accord this felicity to the Ocean and myself, O Illustrious One! Repose thyself therefore and accept our homage, who are worthy of your respect, O Venerable Hanuman 1 Happy am I to see you here!"
Thus accosted by Mainaka, the foremost of mountains, that excellent monkey answered, saying:—"I am grateful for your welcome but time presses and I have vowed not to rest on the way; day is declining, let nothing disturb your serenity."
Then, touching the mountain with his hand, that lion among monkeys, smiling, sailed on through the air, whereupon the mountain and the ocean offered him their respect and gave him their blessings. Rising high into the sky, he looked down on the mountain and the vast ocean and proceeded unsupported in the pathvay of the wind.
Seeing Hanuman achieve this difficult feat, the Celestial Beings and the ascetics acclaimed him; then the Gods present, in their turn, applauded the action of that golden mountain of beautiful slopes, as did Indra, the Thousand-eyed Deity also, and supremely gratified, the consort of Saci paid homage to that illustrious mountain personally, saying:—
"O Lord of Mountains, I am extremely pleased with you! I grant you full security, proceed therefore where you desirest, O Friend. You have fearlessly offered assistance to Hanuman, who was exhausted after crossing four hundred miles of sea, despite every hazard. It is on Rama's behalf, the Son of King Dasaratha, that the monkey has undertaken this journey and you have welcomed him to the best of your power, I am well pleased with you!"
Beholding the King of the Gods, Shatakratu highly gratified, that foremost of mountains experienced supreme felicity and having received that boon from Indra, resumed its former place. Then Hanuman, in a short space, sped over the sea.
Thereupon the Gods, Gandharvas and Siddhas with the ascetics called upon Surasa, the Mother of Serpents, who resembled the sun, saying:—
"The effulgent Son of the Wind is crossing the main, it is for you to delay him awhile Assuming the form of a terrible Rakshasi, as high as a mountain, with monstrous jaws and coppery eyes, do you reach up to the sky. We desire to test his strength and measure his fortitude to see if he is able to overcome you or if he retires discomfited."
At these words, Surasa, having been honoured by the Gods, rose from the ocean in the form of a female demon, deformed and hideous, inspiring terror in all beings and, staying Hanuman in his flight, addressed him saying:—
"O Foremost of Monkeys, you have been destined by the Lords of the World to be my food, I am about to devour you, do you enter my mouth! This boon was formerly granted to me by Dhatar."
With these words she opened her vast mouth wide, placing herself in Maruti's path.
Having listened to Surasa's speech, Hanuman, smiling, answered her:—
"Rama, the Son of Dasaratha, who retired to the Dandaka forest with Lakshmana his brother, and Vaidehi his consort, as a result of a certain exploit, became the enemy of the demons. His beloved wife, the illustrious Sita was subsequently carried away by Ravana. I have been sent to her on Rama's behalf, to whom you should proffer assistance, O You who in-habitest his dominion. Having found Maithili and rejoined Rama, whose deeds are memorable, I shall return and enter your mouth, this I promise you in good faith."
Thus addressed by Hanuman, Surasa, who was able to change her form at will, answered:—"None shall pass me alive, this is the boon I have received." Then seeing him continue on his way, the Mother of Serpents added:—"I have received this favour from Brahma, first enter my mouth then go your way."
Thereafter, extending her capacious jaws, she placed herself in front of Maruti. Surasa's words incensed that lion among monkeys and he said:—
"Open your mouth wide enough to swallow me." Having said this in anger, Surasa extended her jaws to the width of forty miles and Hanuman increased his girth accordingly; thereat Surasa enlarged her mouth to fifty miles, and seeing the jaws of Surasa wide open with its long tongue, terrible to look upon, resembling a mountain, measuring fifty miles, Hanuman enlarged himself to that extent also. Then Surasa increased her mouth to sixty miles and the heroic Hanuman to seventy, whereupon Surasa widened her jaws to eighty miles, and Hanuman, resembling Fire itself, to ninety miles. Then Surasa enlarged her mouth to the extent of an hundred miles and Hanuman, reducing his body like a cloud to the size of a thumb's breadth entered into her mouth and, re-emerging from it, standing in space, addressed her saying:—
"O Dakshayani, salutations to you, I have entered your mouth, now I go to seek out Vaidehi. Your boon has been honoured!"
Seeing Hanuman emerging from her mouth like the moon from the mouth of Rahu, that goddess, assuming her own form, said to the monkey:—
"Go, O Best of Monkeys! Accomplish your mission. You have done well, O Friend! Now restore Sita to the magnanimous Raghava!"
Seeing this third supremely difficult feat accomplished by Hanuman, all beings extolled that monkey, crying: 'Excellent! Excellent!' paying obeisance to him; and he, flying into the sky, with the speed of Garuda, went on across the sea, the abode of Varuna, coursing through the air which was filled with clouds, where birds ranged and which was frequented by Vidyadharas and shining vehicles drawn by lions, elephants, tigers and winged serpents. And Maruti, scattering the clouds like the wind itself, sailed on like Garuda through that firmament, which was illumined by flashes of lightning, resembling the five fires, inhabited by beings, who, by their merits had conquered heaven, occupied by the Deity of Fire bearing the sacrificial oblations. Adorned by the constellations of planets, the sun, the moon and hosts of stars; thronged with Maharishis, Gandharvas, Nagas and Yakshas; pure, stainless, immense; inhabited by Vishvavasu; trodden by the elephant of the King of the Gods, that orbit of the sun and the moon, the canopy of the world, stretched by Brahma over the earth, was visited by countless heroes and aerial beings.
Mighty clouds, shining with the tints of Kalaguru, red, yellow and black, sparkled with brilliance as they w'ere dispelled by Hanuman and he, penetrating those cloudy battlements, emerged once more as the moon in the rainy season disappears and re-appears in the clouds. Everywhere the son of Maruta could be seen cleaving the air like the King of the Mountains furnished with wings.
Seeing him sailing through space, a female demon of immense size, named Singhika, who was able to change her form at will, said to herself:—
'To-day, after a long time, I shall be able to satisfy my hunger! That great creature has appeared in answer to my wish!'
Reflecting thus in her heart, she seized Hanuman's shadow, and he, feeling it held fast, thought:
'My power has suddenly been dissipated like a mighty barque which is retarded in its course by an adverse wind!'
Then looking round on every side, Hanuman perceived that immense being rising from the salty waves.
Seeing that monster, the Son of the Wind-god, reflected:—
'This is without doubt that creature of wonderful form, possessed of exceeding power, given to securing its prey by means of their shadow, who was, desmbed to me by the monkey king.'
Concluding by her action that it was Singhika, that sagacious monkey expanded his frame to gigantic proportions so that he resembled a mass of cloud during the rains.
When the demon saw the enlarged body of that mighty monkey, she extended her jaws so that they resembled the sky and the nether regions and, roaring like thunder, hurled herself upon him, but marking the proportions of her mouth and the vulnerable parts of her body, that intelligent monkey, hard as a diamond, contracting his limbs, threw himself into her jaws.
And the Siddhas and Caranas beheld him diving into her mouth, disappearing like the moon devoured by Rahu at the time of eclipse. And Hanuman, with his sharp nails tore the entrails of that demon and, with the rapidity of thought, emerged, having slain her by his acuteness, endurance and skill and, having overthrown her, began to expand once more. Thereafter that hero among monkeys suddenly regained his power, whilst Singhika, deprived of life by him, torn asunder, sank into the waves, Svyambhu having created him for her destruction.
Perceiving Singhika speedily overcome by him, all the beings who range the skies addressed that foremost of monkeys saying: "Tremendous is this deed that you have performed this day! Mighty was this monster whom you have slain. O Illustrious Monkey, now pursue the purpose dear to thine heart without hindrance. He, who like you, possesses the four attributes: fixity of purpose, circumspection, wisdom and ability, does not fail in his enterprise O Indra among Monkeys!"
Honoured by those whose wishes are fulfilled, as he merited to be, that monkey flew into the sky like Garuda, the devourer of serpents. Then, having reached the further shore, Hanuman looking round on every side, observed countless woods a hundred miles distant and, as he went on, that leader of forest dwellers saw an island adorned with trees of various kinds and thickets belonging to the Malaya mountains; and he surveyed the sea and the lands bordering it and the trees growing on its shores as also the mouths of the ocean's consorts.
Gazing down on his own body which resembled a great cloud covering the sky that self-contained monkey reflected: "Observing mine immense stature and the rapidity of my flight the demons will be seized with curiosity concerning me."
Thinking thus, in his great prudence, he contracted his body, which was the size of a mountain and assumed his ordinary form as one whose wits have been scattered resumes his normal state. Abandoning his gigantic dimensions, he took on his native form, as did Vishnu, the depriver of Bali's power, when he made the three strides.
Constantly mindful of his mission, Hanuman, who was able to assume various graceful forms, having crossed the sea, a feat not to be accomplished by any other, reduced his body to its former size.
Thereafter that high-souled One, resembling a cloudy pavilion, alighted on the summit of the glorious mountain Samva, of many splendid peaks which was covered with Ketaka, Uddalaka and Narikela trees.
Reaching the shore of the sea, the monkey beholding Lanka on the top of the foremost of mountains, descended, having assumed his native form, causing agitation among the deer and birds.
Through his valour having traversed the ocean heaving with waves and abounding in Danavas and Pannagas, Hanuman, alighting on the further shore, beheld Lanka which resembled the city of Amaravati.