Having crossed the unconquerable sea, that mighty monkey, standing on the summit of the Trikuta Mountain, surveyed Lanka and that ape endowed with great prowess was covered by a shower of blossom that fell from the trees on every side, nor did that fortunate monkey, who had just traversed many hundreds of miles of sea without pausing for breath, experience any fatigue.
'I am able to journey many hundreds of miles, what then is this ocean measuring four hundred miles only?'
Thus thinking, that foremost of monkeys, endowed with great energy, turned quickly towards Lanka, having crossed the mighty ocean and he passed between green fields and dense thickets fragrant with the scent of honey and traversed the mountainous district covered with trees and blossoming woods. Stationing himself there, the Son of the Wind-god beheld forests and groves and Lanka itself perched on the summit of the mountain.
Sarala, Kamikara, Khar jura trees in full flower with the balmy Priyala, Muchulinda, Kutaja, Ketaka and Priyangu trees heavy with scent; Nipa, Saptaccada, Asana, Kovidara and Karavira trees laden with buds and flowers, whose crests, waving in the wind abounded with birds, were seen by him and ponds filled with swans and waterfowl and carpeted with white and blue lotuses; flower gardens with ornamental fountains and marvellous parks planted with every kind of tree which yielded fruit and flowers in every season.
Drawing nearer to Lanka, which was protected by Ravana, surrounded by a moat embellished with blue and white lotuses, the auspicious Hanuman noted that a strong guard had been placed round it since Sita's abduction; and demons with formidable bows ranged it on every side and that great and marvellous city was encircled by a golden wall, its buildings as high as mountains, resembling autumn clouds.
The main highways were lined with tall white buildings with hundreds of turrets decorated with flying pennants and banners. Most wonderful, with its golden archways festooned with climbing plants, the city of Lanka appeared to Hanuman to be like the city of the Gods. Built on the summit of a mountain, with its palaces of dazzling white, it resembled an aerial city. Constructed by Vishvakarma and ruled by the Lord of the Titans himself, it seemed to that monkey to be suspended in the sky with its ramparts as the thighs, the stretches of water and woods, the raiment, Shataghnis and spears the hair, the terraces the diadem, Lanka resembled a woman, a creation of Vishvakarma's thought.
Reaching the northern gate resembling Mount Kailasha, which seemed to cleave the skies and support the firmament with its splendid lofty towers and, observing that city thronged with ferocious titans, like a cavern full of venomous snakes, protected by the ocean and, recollecting that terrible adversary, Ravana, the monkey reflected:—
'Even should the mighty armed Raghava succeed in reaching this dread and impregnable city protected by Ravana, what could he do? It is not possible to enter into negotiations with these demons nor could one win them over by bribes nor succeed in sowing dissension among them nor overcome them in fight. Among the monkeys, only four have power to reach this place—Bali's son, Nila, the sagacious Sugriva, and I. But first let me ascertain if Vaidehi still lives or no; after seeing Janaka's daughter, I shall consider these matters further.'
Then that elephant among monkeys, stationed on the summit of the mountain, bethought himself how he could discover Sita, the delight of Rama.
'In this shape I shall not be able to enter the city guarded by valiant and ferocious demons nor outwit those warriors full of courage, energy and prowess. In order to find Janaki, I must enter the city by night at a favourable moment, in a form which will not attract attention so that I may carry through this great enterprise.'
Beholding that city, inaccessible even to the Gods and Asuras, Hanuman, sighing deeply, reflected within himself:
'How can I succeed in finding Maithili, the daughter of Janaka, without being discovered by the perfidious Ravana, Lord of the Demons? How may the work of Rama, who is cognisant of the Self, not be brought to nought? How may I see the daughter of Janaka alone and in secret? Undertakings fail in the face of hindrances raised by time and place or through the fault of an incompetent messenger, as darkness is dispelled by the rising sun. When it concerns that which should be undertaken or avoided, the best laid plans may come to nought through the heedlessness of a messenger nor do they appear in all their splendour; a presumptuous messenger may spoil all!
'How shall I act so that there shall be no incompetence on my part? How may my crossing of the ocean bear fruit? If I am discovered by the demons, the project which the sagacious Rama has formed, who desires the destruction of Ravana, will miscarry. Even if I assume the form of a demon I cannot remain here long without being discovered by them, how much less in some other shape. Even the wind is not able to circulate here unrecognized, I deem. Nothing escapes the vigilance of these formidable titans. If I remain here in my native form, I shall be courting disaster and the purpose of my master will be frustrated, therefore, reducing my size, I shall enter Lanka as a monkey in order to carry through Rama's design. Entering this inaccessible city by night, I shall penetrate into every dwelling in order to find Janaka's daughter.'
Having thus resolved, Hanuman, eager to find Vaidehi, waited for the sun to set.
When the day's orb had sunk behind the Asta Mountain, Maruti reduced his body to the size of a cat, extraordinary to behold and, in the dusk, the mighty Hanuman, springing up, entered that marvellous city traversed by wide streets with rows of houses adorned with golden pillars and balconies, which lent it the appearance of a city of the Gandharvas.
Then he beheld that capital containing seven and eight storied buildings with marble floors inlaid with golden mosaic and golden archways, lending it a great brilliance and, seeing the unimaginable splendour of Lanka, in his eagerness to find Vaidehi, he experienced both sadness and delight.
With its garlands of palaces rivalling each other in whiteness and the arches interlaced with gold of great price, that magnificent city protected by Ravana was encircled by intrepid warriors of great prowess.
And the moon at its full with its flocks of stars seemed to be ministering to Hanuman and, with its myriad rays, filled the worlds with its light. Then that hero among monkeys gazed on the moon shining like a conch-shell, white as milk or a lotus stalk that, floating all luminous in space, resembled a swan swimming on a lake.