Then the fortunate Hanuman beheld that brilliant orb of the night in the midst of the stars covering all beings with its light, like a bull inflamed with desire in the midst of a herd of cows, and that heroic monkey gazed on that moon, floating in the sky, white as the sheen of a conch or a lotus stalk, that star of cooling rays which destroys the sorrows of the world, draws up the tides and sheds its light on all beings. That brightness which shines on the summit of Mount Mandara and at dusk sparkles on the sea, as well as on the lotuses of the lakes, now blazed from the face of that nocturnal planet.
Like a swan on its silvery nest or a lion in a cave of the Mandara Mountain or a warrior on a proud elephant so was the splendour of the moon in the heavens. Like a humpbacked buffalo with pointed horns or the lofty Mountain Shveta with its high peaks or an elephant with gold-encircled tusks, so did the moon appear with its clearly defined prominence.
Just as the great orb of the sun dissolves the ice and frost on muddy pools so was darkness dispelled by the brilliance of the auspicious moon, whose symbol is the hare, so that even the dark patches on its surface appeared bright. Like the King of Beasts issuing from his cave or the lord of elephants entering the deep woods or a sovereign of men ranging his dominions so did the moon appear in its full splendour.
The brightness of its rising had dispelled the night, accentuating the swarthiness of the titans, those eaters of flesh, and awakening thoughts of love in the lover.
Women, whose melodious voices had charmed the ear, having disported themselves, now slept in the arms of their lords, whilst titans of strange and terrible deeds went forth marauding.
And the sagacious Hanuman beheld mansions where intoxication and folly reigned, where chariots, horses and golden seats were seen everywhere in luxurious and warlike abundance.
He beheld titans in violent debate, raising their great arms, discoursing wildly, railing at each other and exchanging acrimonious words; and some were striking their breasts and brandishing great bows, whilst others adjusted their attire or embraced their consorts.
And Hanuman observed courtesans performing their toilet, whilst others slept and incomparably lovely women laughing or frowning in anger. Here gigantic elephants trumpeted, there worship was being performed, whilst warriors were uttering threats, so that the city resembled a lake filled with angry serpents.
And he beheld in that place, persons full of intelligence, able debators, pious men, leaders of fashion and observers of ritual, and beholding those magnificent beings, endowed with every attribute in accord with their nature, Hanuman was delighted; such was their splendour, that even those who were ugly, appeared fair.
And he saw their consorts, full of nobility and of great beauty, worthy of adornment, like unto stars in the excellence of their conduct, who were filled with affection for their protectors, some casting tender glances, others exchanging tokens and some drinking.
And by night, Hanuman observed lovely women being embraced by their paramours, affecting modesty or passion, like birds sporting with their mates, whilst others, in their homes, lay peacefully on the breasts of their lords, full of tenderness, and faithful to their conjugal duty.
Some, lying without raiment, deserted by their lovers, had the radiance of gold and were marvellously beautiful with their golden skins, graceful limbs and complexions like the moonlight.
And Hanuman saw other women in their homes experiencing the height of joy with their lords, full of delight, decked with flowers, charming the hearts of their consorts with their beauty. These lovely women of radiant countenance, resembling the moon, possessing marvellous eyes with sweeping lashes and slanting lids and adorned with innumerable jewels, seemed to Hanuman to resemble flashes of lightning.
But of the nobly-born Sita, offspring of a royal House, fixed in the path of virtue, resembling a delicate flowering creeper or the frail Sadhujata plant, sprung from the mind of Brahma Himself, he could find no trace. Sita, established in the path of chastity, her gaze ever fixed on Rama, ever absorbed in his contemplation, his very mind and heart itself, exalted above all women, a prey to burning grief, her bosom wet with tears, she who was formerly adorned with priceless ornaments, Sita with her charming lashes and enchanting throat, resembling a blue-necked peahen disporting itself in the woods, or the blurred outline of the moon or a golden ingot covered with dust or a scar left by a wound or a golden arrow snapped by the wind.
And that monkey, after his long search, not finding Sita, consort of that lord of men, Rama, the foremost of those skilled in speech, was overcome with grief and bereft of all courage.