Remaining in the precincts of the palace, Hanuman searched the arbours, galleries and the sleeping apartments, eager to discover Sita but without being able to find that lady of gracious appearance there; and, not finding the beloved of that descendant of Raghu, the mighty monkey reflected:—
"Since, despite mine exertions I am unable to find the daughter of Mithila, assuredly Sita is no longer alive. That youthful and virtuous woman, anxious to defend her honour, has been slain by the wicked Lord of the Titans for remaining faithful to her conjugal duty or the daughter of King Janaka has died of fright on seeing those consorts of the Sovereign of the Titans, who are deformed, sallow-skinned, misshapen and who possess huge heads and monstrous forms. Failing to discover Sita, my valour has been expended in vain and a large part of the term allotted to the monkeys has run out; I dare not present myself before Sugriva, who is powerful and given to meting out harsh punishment. I have explored the inner apartments thoroughly but the gentle Sita was not to be found there and I have spent myself in vain. Further, on my return, the assembled monkeys will enquire of me saying: "O Valiant Hanuman, having reached the further shore, what didst you accomplish there, tell us?"
Not having seen Janaka's daughter, what shall I answer? The term fixed having passed, assuredly it is meet that I should fast to death, and what will the aged Jambavan and Angada say with all the assembled monkeys since I have crossed the ocean to no purpose? Yet perseverance is the root of success, perseverance is the root of prosperity, perseverance brings supreme felicity, therefore I will search all those places still left unexplored by me. Moreover it is my intention to put forth fresh efforts and investigate all those regions not yet visited by me and the banqueting halls, the gardens, the sports pavilions, the courtyards, dwellings, highways, alleys and chariots, though already searched by me, shall be examined once again.
Having thus resolved, Hanuman set about exploring the basements, temples and many-storied dwellings, going up and down, to and fro, opening doors and closing others, entering here and making an exit there, till there was not even the space of four fingers left unscrutinized by him. And he visited the galleries running inside the ramparts and terraces supported by stanchions and the groves and lotus pools and he saw there hideous and monstrous female titans of every shape but not the daughter of Janaka; and the illustrious consorts of Vidyadharas fell under his gaze but not the beloved of Raghava.
Hanuman beheld there also the daughters of Nagas, of lovely limbs, whose faces shone like the full moon, who had been forcibly brought there by the Lord of the Titans, but not the cherished daughter of Janaka and, not seeing her among all those lovely women, a profound despair seized that warrior born of Maruta.
Reflecting that the exertions of all those leaders of monkeys and the crossing of the ocean had proved vain, the son of Anila became extremely anxious and descended from that aerial car. Thereafter Hanuman, born of Maruta, grew pensive and a great melancholy invaded his soul.