Having meditated for a space, Hanuman, who had rejoined Sita in thought, leapt from the rampart on to the surrounding wall and trembling with delight, that mighty monkey, standing there, beheld every variety of tree and flower, it being early spring He saw Sala, Ashoka, Bhavya, Champaka, Uddalaka, Nagavriksha, Mango and Kapimukha trees in flower with clumps of Amras intertwined with hundreds of creepers. And Hanuman, leaping down into that enchanting grove, like an arrow shot from a bow, entered that garden resembling the rising sun which re-echoed to the song of birds, planted with gold and silver saplings and containing flocks of birds and deer with trees of varying fragrance which.filled him with wonder.
Abounding in trees of every kind, laden with flowers and fruit, where cuckoos called deliriously and swarms of bees hummed, where all creatures expressed happiness in their movements, where the cries of the peacock could be heard and waterfowl teemed, the heart of the beholder was ravished.
And Hanuman, searching for that princess of beautiful and faultless limbs, woke the birds that had been sleeping sweetly and blown by the wind set up by the wings of those birds in flight, a shower of variegated blossom fell, covering Hanuman, the son of the Wind-god in the midst of the Ashoka Grove lending him the loveliness of a hill covered with flowers. Then all the creatures beholding that monkey, as they darted from all sides, thought: "It is the God of Spring".
Wholly hidden in blossom which had fallen from the trees, the earth looked like a bride covered with jewels and, shaken in diverse ways by the motion of that impetuous monkey the trees rained down a shower of multi-coloured blooms. And those trees, whose tops were stripped of leaves, from which both blossom and fruit had fallen, looked like gamblers who have staked their raiment and possessions only to lose all. Buffetted by Hanuman's leaping, those lovely trees speedily let their flowers, leaves and fruit fall to the ground and, deserted by the birds, no longer able to seek shelter there, on account of the shaking administered by Maruti, presented their bare branches only, so that the Ashoka grove, battered by the blows of the monkey's feet and tail, resembled a youthful woman with her locks dishevelled, the brightness of her lips and teeth dimmed, her tilaka mark effaced and her arms and legs scarred. And in his haste, that monkey snapped the clusters of creepers as the wind dispels the clouds during the rainy season.
Ranging here and there, that monkey observed places that were paved with gold and silver with ponds filled with translucent water, their steps encrusted with valuable gems, pearls and coral, their floors being of crystal and the banks set with trees of Kancana gold which emitted a dazzling light.
These pools were covered with clumps of lotuses and lilies whilst waterfowl enhanced their beauty and they re-echoed to the cry of Natyuhas, swans and geese; broad and beautiful streams, bordered on every side by trees, fed them with their waters which resembled Amrita and glided under variegated shrubs decorated by hundreds of creepers, the ground being carpeted by rhododendron and oleander flowers.
Then that foremost of monkeys beheld a high hill, bright as a cloud crowned with lofty peaks, many kinds of trees and filled with caves, and it was one of the wonders of the world 1 And he beheld a river falling from those heights, like a youthful woman tearing herself from her lover's aims in order to leave him and the branches of the trees, sweeping the water, looked as if the companions of that damsel were detaining her, whilst fuither down, Hanuman beheld that stream returning on its course, as if the maiden, appeased, were reconciled to her beloved.
Thereafter at some distance from the river, a pool filled with lotuses, frequented by birds of every kind drew the gaze of that lion among monkeys, Hanuman, born of Maruta; and he saw a fountain of fresh water with enchanting steps made of precious gems, its basin strewn with pearls, which was embellished on every side with countless herds of deer, ravishing groves, and mansions built by Vishvakarma himself, adorned with artificial woods and trees laden with fruit and flowers, their branches spreading like umbrellas giving shade, whilst the ground beneath was paved with gold and silver.
And that great monkey beheld a single golden Shingshapa tree surrounded by a golden dais and he saw many flower beds and trees which resembled flames, the radiance of which rivalled Mount Meru and caused him to think they were made of gold. Seeing those beautiful golden trees, with their flowering crests, buds and shoots agitated by the wind, emitting a sound like the tinkling of many ornaments, Hanuman was astounded.
Climbing quickly into that many-leafed Shingshapa tree Hanuman reflected: "From here I may perchance behold Vaidehi, that unhappy being who sighs for Rama's presence and who, filled with grief, wanders aimlessly to and fro. Without doubt, this Ashoka Grove embellished by Candana, Champaka and Vakula trees, belongs to the wicked Ravana. Here by this lovely pool frequented by birds, that princess and royal spouse, Sita, will certainly repair. She, the beloved of Raghava, accustomed to wander in the woods, bereft of Rama, will assuredly come hither. That lady, whose eyes resemble a doe's, tormented with grief on account of separation from Rama, fond of roving in the woods, will certainly walk in this grove. She, the chaste and virtuous wife of Rama, Janaka's daughter, who ever loved the creatures of the forest, anxious to offer up her devotion, will come to this river of translucent waters, for this purpose.
"Truly this beautiful grove is worthy to be the abode of that chaste consort of the king of men, Rama. If that goddess, whose countenance resembles the moon, still lives, she will inevitably visit this river of cool waters."
Thus reflected the high-souled Hanuman, expecting the consort of that lord of men to appear and, concealing himself in the Shingshapa tree covered with leaves and flowers, gazed out over the whole scene.