Then the moon, pure as a waterlily, rose in the stainless heavens, sailing through the firmament like a swan floating on blue waters. As if to aid him with her light, that pure and clear orb covered the Son of Pavana with her cool rays.
Thereupon that monkey beheld Sita endowed with a moonlike countenance who, under the load of grief, resembled a heavily laden ship foundering in the waves. And gazing on Vaidehi, Hanuman, born of Maruta, observed a number of grim-visaged titan women at a distance, some with but a single eye or ear, some with ears concealing their visage, some without ears, some with noses on their foreheads, some possessed of disproportionately large heads and long necks, some with sparse hair and others covered with hair so that they appeared to be wrapped in a woollen cloth; the ears and brows of some were set low, and their breasts and bellies protruded; others were knock-kneed, stunted, humpbacked, crooked, dwarfed, unkempt, their mouths set awry, their eyes inflamed, their faces fearful to behold Hideous, irascible, quarrelsome, they were armed with spears, darts, hammers and mallets and some had snouts like bears or the muzzles of deer or the faces of tigers, camels, buffalo, goats and jackals and some had the feet of elephants, camels, horses and the heads of some were sunk in their breasts.
Some had a single hand or foot, some the ears of asses, horses, kine and elephants or some the ears of monkeys. Some had enormous noses, some crooked noses and some none at all, some had noses like the trunks of elephants, some had their noses fixed in their foreheads, through which they breathed like beasts. The feet of some were like elephants and some had the feet of kine, some were hairy; some had huge heads, gigantic faces and long tongues; some had the heads of goats, elephants, cows, pigs, horses, camels and donkeys.
These titan women of formidable appearance held spears and maces in their hands, they were ill-humoured and rejoiced in discord. Their hair was black as soot or smoke-coloured, their aspect repellant and they feasted continually, regaling themselves on wine and meat without surcease, their bodies being spattered with blood from the flesh they consumed.
That foremost of monkeys surveyed those titan women whose appearance caused his hair to stand on end and who were seated in a circle round the many-branched tree under which the divine and irreproachable Janaki stood. And the graceful Hanuman beheld that daughter of Janaka bereft of her radiance, consumed with grief, her locks soiled with dust, like a star which has fallen on the earth its merits exhausted, Sita, famed throughout the worlds for her fidelity, yet with little hope of being re-united with her lord.
Stripped of her jewels, she whose chief ornament was her devotion to her lord, held captive by Ravana, appeared like a female elephant separated from the herd who has been attacked by a lion or like the moonlight enveloped in cloud at the end of the rainy season. Her beauty dimmed, she resembled a stringed instrument that one has ceased to pluck and has laid aside. Far from her lord, that illustrious one had fallen under the sway of the titans without having merited it. Sunk in an ocean of grief, surrounded by those titan women in the midst of the Ashoka Grove, she looked like Rohini about to be devoured by Rahu and, beholding her there, Hanuman thought she resembled a creeper divested of its blooms. Having lost her radiance, her limbs covered with dust, with her hidden grace she looked like a lotus spattered with mud.
The monkey, Hanuman, beheld that youthful woman, whose eyes resembled a doe's, clothed in a soiled and tattered cloth and though that blessed one was shorn of her beauty, yet her soul did not lose its transcendency, upheld as it was by the thought of Rama's glory and safeguarded by her own virtue.
Beholding Sita, whose eyes, wide with fear, resembled a doe's, casting her glances here and there like a fawn and consuming the trees and their leaves with her sighs, like a mountainous wave rising from the ocean of adversity, incomparably beautiful with her slender limbs and graceful form, bereft of ornaments, Maruti experienced a great felicity; and Hanuman wept tears of joy at this fortunate meeting and silently offered obeisance to Rama.
Having bowed down to Rama and Lakshmana, the valiant Hanuman, filled with happiness on having beheld Sita, remained there wholly concealed.