Thereupon Ravana approaching Sita, who was helpless, surrounded by female titans and vowed to a life of austerity, with sweet words and courteous gestures said to her:—
"O You whose thighs resemble the trunk of an elephant, who, beholding me dost seek to conceal your breasts and your body as if you didst fear me, O Lady of large eyes, I love you. Be gracious to me, O You of charming looks, who art adored by all the world! There is no man present here nor any titan able to change his form at will therefore banish the fear which I inspire in you, O Sita.
"It has ever been the unquestioned and special privilege of titans to unite themselves with the wives of others, either taking them of their own free will or bearing them away by force. In spite of this, O Maithili, I shall not lay hands on you since you have no affection for me but, for myself, I am completely under your sway, therefore trust in me and respond to my love. O Goddess, have no fear of me, take courage, O Dear One, and do not let thyself be consumed with grief. To wear but a single plait, to lie on the earth in soiled attire and fast unnecessarily does not become you. In my company, O Maithili, do you enjoy garlands, perfumes, sandal, ornaments, wine, rich beds and seats, singing, dancing and music. You are a pearl among women, do not remain in this condition, adorn thyself as heretofore. Having united thyself with me, O Lady of Lovely Form, what will not be thine?
"Thine enchanting youth is passing away, which like the water of a river, once gone, does not return. O You of Fair Looks, the creator of your loveliness, Vishvakrita, after devising you, ceased from his work for I see none who is equal to you in loveliness and grace! Who, having seen you, resplendent with beauty, could withstand you O Vaidehi? Even Brahma Himself is moved, how much more other beings? O You whose countenance resembles the moon, on whatever part of your body mine eyes rest, my gaze is riveted. O Maithili, do you become my consort and renounce this your folly. Become the foremost queen of these innumerable and lovely women who belong to me. O Timid One, all the treasure I have won throughout the worlds I offer you as also my kingdom. O Sportive Damsel, for your sake, having subjugated the entire earth with its many cities, I will confer them on King Janaka. None on this earth can withstand my prowess; behold mine immeasurable valour in battle I Did not the Celestials and the Demons find me irresistible on the battlefield as I broke through their ranks shattering their standards?
"Therefore yield to my desire and attire thyself in splendid robes, letting brilliant gems adorn your person. O Timid One, enjoy every comfort and luxury according to your pleasure, divert thyself and distribute land and treasure to others. Live happily depending on my support and exercise supreme authority. By my favour, all your relatives shall share your felicity. Observe my prosperity and glory, O Gentle Lady, what canst you hope from Rama who is clothed in robes of bark? O Fortunate One, Rama has been deprived of his kingdom and is bereft of his might, he practises asceticism, his couch is the bare earth, indeed it is doubtful whether he still lives. O Vaidehi, Rama will never be able to find you, you who resemblest a star veiled by dark clouds preceded by cranes. Raghava will never rescue you from my hands, as Hiranyakashipu was not able to recover his consort Kirti, who had fallen under the sway of Indra.
"O Lady of Sweet Smiles, O You of lovely teeth and beautiful eyes, you dost ravish my heart as Suparna carried away a serpent. Although your robe is torn and stained and you are stripped of ornaments, seeing you, my mind turns away from all my other consorts. O Daughter of Janaka, do you hold sway over all the women in my harem, who are endowed with every accomplishment. O Princess of raven locks, these women, the foremost among the beauties of the world, shall be your slaves and attend on you as the Apsaras attend on Shri. O Graceful Princess, enjoy the pleasures of the world with me and the riches of Kuvera to the utmost of your desires. O Goddess, neither in asceticism, strength, prowess, wealth nor fame is Rama equal to me. Therefore drink, eat, enjoy thyself and indulge in every pleasure. I shall confer on you immense wealth, nay, the whole world.
"Do you satisfy all your desires in my company, O Timid One, and let your relatives share your felicity also. Adorned with dazzling golden bracelets, O Beautiful One, in my company range the groves of flowering trees on the shores of the sea where the black bees hum."