Hearing the words of that terrible titan, Sita, overwhelmed with grief, answered in a faint and feeble voice. The unfortunate Sita, afflicted and trembling, faithful to her lord and anxious to preserve her virtue, her heart fixed on Rama, placed a straw between Ravana and herself and with a sweet smile answered him, saying:—
"Take back your heart and set it on thine own consorts. As a sinner may not aspire to heaven, so should you not expect to win me. That which should never be done and is condemned in a woman faithful to her lord, I shall never do. Born in a noble House, I have been joined to a pious family."
Having spoken thus to Ravana, the virtuous Vaidehi, turning her back on him, continued:—
"It is not meet that I become your wife since I am united to another. Do your duty and follow the rules laid down by men of integrity. The wives of others, like thine own, are deserving of protection, O Prowler of the Night. Do you furnish a good example and enjoy thine own consorts. That wretch who, in the inconstancy and levity of his heart, is not satisfied with his own wives, will be brought to misery by those of others. Either no pious men exist here or you dost not follow their example, since your mind is perverse and turns from what is virtuous; or the wise having uttered sage counsel, you, to the destruction of the titans, dost ignore them.
"Prosperity, kingdom and city are all brought to nought in the hands of a vicious monarch who is not master of himself, hence Lanka, overflowing with treasure, having you for her king, will suffer destruction'ere long. O Ravana, that wicked being who brings about his own downfall, succumbs, to the delight of all. When you meetest with thine end, this evil deed will cause the oppressed to say: 'Fortunate are we that this great tyrant has fallen.'
"You are not able to tempt me with wealth and riches; as the light of the sun cannot be separated from the sun so do I belong to Raghava. Having rested on the arm of that Lord of Men, how should I depend on any other? Like unto the spiritual truth known to a brahmin faithful to his vows, I belong to the Lord of the World alone and am lawfully wedded to him. It is to thine own advantage to restore me to Rama, wretched as I am, like unto a she-elephant anxiously awaiting her mate in the forest. It behoves you to seek Rama's friendship, that lion among men, if you desires to preserve Lanka and dost not wish to bring about thine own destruction. He is wise, conversant with every duty and ever eager to serve those who seek his protection; form an alliance with him if you desirest to survive. Seek to conciliate Rama, who is full of devotion to those who take refuge in him and humbly conduct me to him once more. If you dost bring me back to the greatest of the Raghus, your well-being is assured but if you dost act otherwise you are doomed. You mayest evade the thunderbolt of Indra, even death himself may overlook you but there will be no refuge for you from the fury of Raghava, that lord of men, when you dost hear the terrible twanging of Rama's bow resembling the thunderbolt hurled by Indra. Soon shall those arrows, bearing the impress of Rama and Lakshmana, like serpents with flaming jaws, penetrate Lanka and those shafts, decorated with heron's plumes, shall cover the whole city annihilating the titans. As Vainateya bears away great reptiles, so shall that eagle, Rama, speedily bear away the titans.
"And like unto Vishnu wresting the radiant Shri from the Asuras by covering the worlds in three strides, so shall my lord, the destroyer of his foes, recover me from you.
"This cowardly deed has been perpetrated by you in order to revenge thyself for the destruction of Janasthana and the hosts of the titans. In the absence of these two brothers, those lions among men who had gone forth hunting, didst you carry me away, O Vile Wretch; but, dog that you are, you didst not dare stand before those tigers, Rama and Lakshmana! Wealth and friends will be of no avail to you in conflict with them and you shalt be defeated as the one-handed Vritra who entered into combat with the two-handed Indra.
"Soon shall my protector, Rama, accompanied by Saumitri, draw out your life's breaths, as the sun with its rays dries up shallow water.
Whether you takest refuge in the abode of Kuvera or terrified, descendest into Varuna's realm, you shalt assuredly perish, struck down by the son of Dasaratha, like a mighty tree felled by lightning."