Having spoken thus to Maithili and issued his commands to the titan women, Ravana, the scourge of his foes, went away. And that Sovereign of the Titans having returned to his inner apartment, those women of hideous appearance bore down on Sita and, filled with ire, addressed her in harsh tones, saying:—
"You dost not fully value an alliance with the offspring of Paulastya the illustrious Ravana, the magnanimous Dashagriva, O Sita."
Thereafter, one among them named Ekjata, her eyes inflamed with anger addressed Sita of small belly, saying:—"According to tradition, Paulastya is the fourth of the six Prajapatis, a mind-born son of Brahma renowned in all the world, O Sita, and that glorious Ascetic Vaishravas sprang from the mind of that great Rishi whose glory equalled the Prajapatis. O Large-eyed Princess, his son was Ravana, the scourge of his foes; it behoves you to become the consort of that King of Titans. Why dost you not consent, O You of Lovely Form?"
Thereupon another titan called Harijata, rolling her eyes that resembled a cat's, said furiously: "It is for you to become the wife of one who defeated the thirty-three Celestials and their king in combat; dost you not desire to be united with him who is heroic, of indomitable prowess and never turns back in battle? Renouncing his cherished and beloved Queen Mandodari, that mighty King Ravana will be thine, and seek the gorgeous inner apartment, enriched by thousands of women adorned with jewels, and you will be the object of his worship!"
There followed another titan by name Vikata, who said: "He who again and again triumphs over the Gandharvas, Nagas and Danavas by his valour in battle has made advances to you, why dost you not wish to be the wife of that illustrious Lord of Titans, Ravana, who is endowed with riches?"
Thereafter the titan, Durmukhi spoke saying:—"O Lady of Lovely Lashes, why dost you not yield to him, in fear of whom the sun dares not shine nor the wind blow, at whose command the trees shower down their blooms and the hills and clouds loose their floods.
"O Beautiful One, why dost you not consent to be the consort of that King of kings, Ravana? We speak thus for your welfare; accede to our request, O Goddess of Sweet Smiles or you shalt surely die."!