Her face bathed in tears, with bowed head the daughter of Janaka began to lament once more and, distracted with grief, beside herself, she rolled on the earth like a colt as though she had lost her senses, crying:—
"I, the spouse of Raghava, who allowed himself to be deceived by the titans able to change their form at will, was seized by the ruthless Ravana who bore me away. Having been made captive by the titans, subject to their insults and menaces, sunk in grief and anxiety, I am no longer able to endure life. Of what use is existence, wealth or jewels to me, living amidst the demons far from Rama of the great Car? Assuredly my heart must be of iron, ageless and imperishable, since it does not break under mine affliction. Woe is me, vile and wicked creature that I am, since I still breathe, in the absence of my lord. Even my left foot shall not touch that Ranger of the Night, how should I feel any love for Ravana, a titan? He, who in his perversity seeks to seduce me, is not conversant with my nature, nor my race, nor the aversion in which he is held by me. Torn to pieces, rent limb from limb or cast into the fire, I shall never submit to Ravana, what use is there in further discussion?
"It is well known that Raghava is righteous, grateful and compassionate; that he has become pitiless is due to mine evil karma. Will he not deliver me, he who in Janasthana destroyed fourteen thousand titans singlehanded? Even were Lanka in the midst of the sea and inaccessible, Raghava's arrows would transcend all obstacles. What can prevent the valiant Rama from rejoining his beloved wife, who has been borne away by a titan? I fear that the elder brother of Lakshmana does not know that I am here, for if he did, that warrior would not endure this affront.
"The King of the Vultures, who would have informed Rama of mine abduction, was slain by Ravana in the struggle. Great indeed was the courage manifested by Jatayu in coming to mine aid and, despite his age, seeking to destroy Ravana. Did Raghava know that I was here, this very hour, he would rid the world of titans with his flaming shafts; he would burn up Lanka, swallow the ocean and blot out the might of Ravana. From each dwelling the groans and cries of the female titans, their husbands slain, would have risen, as mine do now or even louder, and Rama, aided by Lakshmana would range the city, slaughtering the titans, for the foe instantly yields up his life, who comes face to face with them. Then Lanka, its streets filled with smoke issuing from the funeral pyres, encircled by wreaths of vultures, would soon resemble a charnel house. Soon shall I be avenged! This matter will cost you all dear, for such inauspicious omens are to be seen in Lanka, that she will soon be shorn of her splendour.
The King of the Titans, the vicious Ravana having been slain, Lanka, now prosperous and happy, will resemble a widow. Assuredly I shall soon hear the wailing of the daughters of the titans in every dwelling, mourning in their sorrow. Plunged in darkness, deprived of her glory, her valiant titans slain, the city of Lanka will perish, consumed by Rama's arrows, when that hero, the corners of whose eyes are red, learns that I am held captive in the titan's abode. The time fixed by that cruel and wicked Ravana is at hand and that vicious wretch has resolved to destroy me. To ignore what is prohibited, is the practice of these base demons. Terrible is the calamity which will follow this outrage; those titans who live on flesh are ignorant of virtue. Assuredly that titan intends me for his morning repast; I am helpless, what can I do in the absence of my beloved? Deprived of my lord's presence, stricken with grief, not beholding Rama, the corners of whose eyes are red, may I soon see the God Vaivasvata! Nay, the elder brother of Bharata is unaware that I still live, else he and Lakshmana would have scoured the earth for me. Without doubt, overwhelmed by my foes, that warrior, the elder brother of Lakshmana has renounced his body and repaired to the Celestial Region.
Happy are the Gods, Gandharvas, Siddhas and the great Rishis who are able to look on the heroic Rama. It may be that the sagacious and royal Sage Rama, has been absorbed in the Absolute and has no longer any need of a consort or that one who is present inspires joy, but the absent are forgotten. Perchance the fault is mine, and I have lost the right to happiness, I, the lovely Sita, separated from the illustrious Rama. Death to me is preferable to life, bereft of that magnanimous One, that great hero of imperishable exploits, the destroyer of his foes! It may be that the two brothers, those chiefs of men have laid down their arms, they who feed on the roots and woodland fruits, passing their lives in the forest or they have been put to death through treachery by the vile Ravana, the last of the titans. If that be so, then with all my heart I long for death nor is it forbidden me in my distress. Blessed are those high-souled ascetics who are illumined, their senses subdued, for whom there is neither desire nor aversion; for them, neither love nor hate gives rise to joy or pain; they are free; salutations to those great beings! Forsaken by the beloved Rama, versed in the science of the soul and having fallen into the power of the wicked Ravana, I shall yield up my life."