Hearing the harsh speech of that King of the Titans, Ravana, the unfortunate Sita began to tremble, as a she-elephant attacked by a lion on the edge of the forest.
Threatened by Ravana and encircled by the titans, that timid damsel gave way to despair like a young girl abandoned in a wood.
She reflected: "The sages affirm truly that death does not come before the appointed hour since, worthless creature that I am, I still live after these insults. Bereft of happiness, filled with misery, my heart must be hard indeed that it does not break into a hundred pieces this day, like the crest of a mountain struck by lightning. Nay, I am not to blame for this—I may be slain by that dreadful monster but I can no more give him my affection than a brahmin can impart the teachings of the Veda to one of low caste. If that Lord of the Worlds does not appear at the appointed hour, that vile King of the Titans will cut me to pieces with his sharp weapons as a surgeon cuts the foetus from the heart of its mother. Two months will quickly pass away and I shall have to suffer the pain of death, unhappy creature that I am, like a thief, who having disobeyed his sovereign is bound and being led to execution when the night is over.
"O Rama, O Lakshmana, O Sumitra! O Mother of Rama! O My Mothers! I am about to perish miserably as a ship foundering in the sea battered by the storm. Assuredly those two valiant princes must have fallen under the blows of that creature disguised as a deer, like a bull or lion struck by lightning. There is no doubt that it was fate in the form of a deer that deluded me, unfortunate creature that I am and in my folly I sent those two princes, Rama and Lakshmana to capture it. Alas I O Rama, O You of truthful vows and long arms I O You, whose countenance shines like the full moon I O My Life, you, the benefactor and friend of all beings, art not aware that I am about to be put to death by the titans. For me, who have no other God than my lord, my patience, my sleeping on the bare ground, my observance of duty, my devotion to my husband have all been in vain, as a service rendered to one who is ungrateful. Vain has it been, that I have fulfilled my duty and that I am wholly devoted to you alone since I do not behold you and in thine absence, wasting away, pale and weak, have given up all hope of being re-united with you. Having courageously carried out the behests of your sire, having fulfilled your vow, returning from the forest, you shalt sport with many large-eyed ladies in peace. O Rama, I, who conceived a lasting love for you, to mine own destruction was wholly attached to you; having practised asceticism and observed my vows, I am about to lose my life, woe unto me, unfortunate wretch that I am! Gladly would I take my life by means of poison or by sharp weapons but there is none who will bring them to me in this city of the titans."
Overcome by sorrow, reflecting for a long time, Sita undid the cord that tied her hair, saying:—"I shall hang myself with this cord and reach the abode of death."
Then the lovely Sita, whose form was full of grace, took hold of a branch of the tree under which she stood and became absorbed in the thought of Rama, Lakshmana and her kinsfolk; and many auspicious signs removing her grief and lending her courage, well-known in the world, appeared to her, indicating the advent of future well-being.