The valiant Hanuman who had heard all that Sita, Trijata and the titans had said, gazed on that illustrious damsel who resembled a celestial being from the Nandana Gardens and many thoughts flitted through the mind of that monkey.
He reflected: "She, who was sought in every place by thousands and millions of monkeys, is here and it is I who have found her. Engaged as a skilful spy to discover the strength of the enemy I have stolen into the city and know everything concerning the might of Ravana and the resources of the titans as also of their capital. It is for me to console the consort of that immeasurably illustrious prince, who is compassionate to all beings, for she is pining for her lord. I shall seek to gain the confidence of this lady, whose countenance resembles the full moon, who formerly was unacquainted with suffering and who cannot see any end to her woes. If I return, without having comforted that virtuous lady whose soul is overwhelmed with grief, my journey will have been in vain. In sooth, when I have departed, that illustrious Princess Janaki, giving up all hope of deliverance, will yield up her life and that long-armed warrior, whose countenance resembles the full moon, anxious to behold Sita is equally worthy of consolation. To speak to her in the presence of these titans is impossible, what then shall I do? I am in a great dilemna. If I do not give her some reassurance in the last hour of the night, she will undoubtedly give up her life and if Rama enquires of me, 'What did Sita of slender waist say?' what answer can I give to him if I have had no converse with her? If I return without having achieved my purpose regarding Sita, Kakutstha will consume me with his fiery glance, then it were vain to urge my master to take action for Rama's sake, by placing himself at the head of his forces.
"I shall take the first opportunity offered by these titan women to reassure that sorely tried lady, yet in this insignificant form and monkey shape, if I assume a human voice and speak in sanskrita like a sage, Sita will deem me to be Ravana and she will be terrified! It is essential however that I express myself in the human tongue, how otherwise can I inspire this irreproachable lady with courage? Seeing my shape and hearing me speak, Janaki, who has been terrorised by the titans, will be seized with an even greater fear and that illustrious and large-eyed Sita will cry out, imagining me to be Ravana, who is able to change his form at will.
"Hearing her cry, the whole company of titans, armed with every kind of weapon, will form themselves into a great mass resembling death itself and, hideous and indomitable, will rush on me from every side and seek to destroy me or take me captive. Then, beholding me leap from branch to branch and climb to the tops of the highest trees, they will become exceedingly alarmed and will fill the woods with their wild cries; thereafter they will call the titans who are engaged in guarding the king's palace to their aid and, on account of their native excitability, will seize hold of every kind of weapon, spears, darts, and swords and hasten to join in the fray. Surrounded by them on all sides, if I slay that host of titans, exhausted, I shall be unable to cross the ocean or they, outnumbering me, will succeed in capturing me and, being a prisoner, that lady will reap no benefit from my attempt.
"Alternatively, in their passion for evil doing, they may even slay the daughter of Janaka, which will completely defeat the great design of Rama and Sugriva! Janaki dwells in an inaccessible and secret place surrounded by the sea, guarded on all sides by the titans with all its approaches closed. If I am slain or captured by the titans in combat, I know of no other monkey who can cross the four hundred miles of sea. Even if I destroy thousands of titans, I should not then be able to reach the other shore of the vast ocean. Battles are hazardous and I do not like to engage in so uncertain an enterprise; what wise person would take any risk in a matter of trust? It would be a great error to frighten Vaidehi by addressing her, yet if I do not do so, she will surely perish. Undertakings often fail through an incompetent messenger unable to take advantage of time and place, as darkness is overcome by the rising sun; in such cases, whether it concerns the accomplishment or avoidance of any matter, the most widely planned projects do not succeed. Assuredly a presumptuous messenger ruins all 1 How shall I act therefore, so that my mission does not prove vain? How shall I show myself equal to this charge? How shall the crossing of the ocean not prove to have been useless? How can I persuade Sita to listen to me without inspiring fear in her?"
Having put all these questions to himself, Hanuman formed the following resolution:
"I shall speak to her of Rama of immortal exploits, for then his dear consort will not be afraid of me since she is wholly absorbed in the thought of her lord. In a gentle voice, uttering the name of Rama, the foremost of the Ikshvakus of subdued soul and, lauding his piety and renown in sweet accents, I shall induce Sita to listen to me. There is nothing I will not do to inspire her with confidence."
Thereupon, the mighty Hanuman, looking down on the consort of the Lord of the World from the branches of the tree where he sat concealed, spoke to her in melodious and candid tones.