Having examined the matter from every aspect, that intelligent monkey began to pour sweet words into Vaidehi's ear, saying:—406
"There was a king named Dasaratha, the possessor of chariots, horses and elephants, one by nature devout and illustrious, the glory of the Ikshvakus. To harm none was his delight and he was high-minded and compassionate, a true hero of his race that found its splendour and the growth of its prosperity in him. Clad in all the insignia of royalty and majesty, that lion among kings, renowned in the four regions, shed the felicity he enjoyed over all. His beloved eldest son, whose countenance was as bright as the moon, was called Rama, possessor of a keen intellect and the most skilled of archers. Faithful to his vows, the defender of his people, the protector of all beings, upholder of justice, he was the scourge of his foes.
"At the command of his aged sire, his word his bond, that hero accompanied by his consort and his brother was banished to the forest. Whilst giving himself up to the chase in that vast solitude, he slew large numbers of valiant titans who were able to change their form at will.
When Ravana learnt that he had destroyed Janasthana and killed Khara and Dushana, he in fury, bore Janaki away, having lured her lord far into the forest by the aid of Marica in the form of a deer.
"Whilst searching everywhere to discover the divine and irreproachable Sita, Rama found a friend in the forest, the Monkey Sugriva, Bringing about the destruction of Bali, Rama, the conqueror of hostile cities, conferred the monkey kingdom on the magnanimous Sugriva and by his decree, thousands of monkeys, able to change their form at will, set out to search for that goddess in every region. I am one of those who, at the instance of Sampati, crossed the sea four hundred miles in width, on account of that large-eyed beauty. Hearing of her comeliness, her grace and distinguishing characteristics from Rama, I have been enabled to find her at last."
Having spoken thus, that bull among monkeys fell silent.
And Janaki was extremely astonished, hearing that speech and brushing aside her lovely tangled locks which concealed her face, she looked up into the Shingshapa tree.
Hearing the words of that monkey, Sita glanced enquiringly to the four quarters and other regions, whilst an extreme delight flooded her whole being as she remembered Rama. Then, glancing from side to side and up and down, she espied the son of Vata, who resembled the rising sun, that minister of the King of the Monkeys of incomparable wisdom.