Slipping down from the. tree, Hanuman, whose face was the colour of coral, attired in a humble guise, approached Sita and that mighty son of the Wind with joined palms addressed her in gentle tones, saying:
"Who art you, O Lady, whose eyes resemble lotus petals, who, wearing a soiled silken garment art supporting thyself by the branch of the tree? O Irreproachable One, why are tears of suffering falling from thine eyes, that resemble the lotus, as water flows from a broken vessel? O Fair One, who art you among the Celestials, Titans, Nagas, Gandharvas, Rakshas, Yakshas and Kinneras? Or do the Rudras claim that you are born of them or the Wind-gods or the Vasus, O Lady of exquisite features? To me you appearest to be of divine origin. Art you Rohini, foremost and most brilliant of stars, who, separated from the moon has fallen from the abode of the immortals? Or art you the lovely dark-eyed Arundhati, who has fled in wrath or in pride from her lord, Shri Vasishtha? Is it for a son, a father, a brother or a husband, whose departure from this world you are mourning, O Lady of slender waist? By your tears and sighs and your lying on the earth, it seems to me that you are not a celestial being and further you dost ever and again call on the name of a king. From the marks on your person I deem you to be the consort or the daughter of a monarch. Art you not Sita, who was ruthlessly borne away by Ravana from Janasthana? May prosperity attend you 1 From your wretched plight, thine unrivalled beauty and thine ascetic garb, I deem you to be Rama's consort."
Hearing Hanuman's words and filled with joy at the sound of Rama's name, Vaidehi answered him, as he stood beneath the tree, saying:
"I am the daughter-in-law of Dasaratha, foremost among the kings of the world, a knower of the Self, the destroyer of hostile armies. I am the daughter of King Janaka, the magnanimous sovereign of Videha and my name is Sita, the consort of the highly intelligent Rama, who is endowed with wisdom. For twelve years I dwelt in Raghava's abode, experiencing every earthly delight and satisfying every desire. In the thirteenth year, the king, with the approval of his ministers, resolved to install Rama, the joy of the House of Ikshvaku on the throne.
As they were preparing to anoint Rama as heir-apparent, Queen Kaikeyi addressed her lord, saying:—
"'I will neither eat nor drink of that which is served to me each day but shall put an end to my existence if Rama be installed. Let the boons that, in gratitude, you didst grant me, be redeemed and let Raghava repair to the forest'.
"The king, faithful to his bond, recollected the boons made to the queen and hearing those cruel and unpleasing words was lost in grief. Then that aged monarch, adhering firmly to his vow, weeping, besought his eldest son to renounce the throne. That illustrious prince to whom the words of his sire were more to be prized than the throne, inwardly assenting, promised to obey. Rama, ever a giver, seeking no return, truthful, never uttering a falsehood even were his life to be made forfeit, is essentially brave. Laying aside his costly attire, the highly glorious Rama with his whole heart, renounced the kingdom and gave me into his mother's keeping, but I, assuming the garb of an ascetic, quickly prepared to accompany him to the forest, for, separated from him, I could not bear to dwell even in the celestial regions. Then the fortunate Saumitri, the enhancer of his friends' delight, donning robes of bark and kusha grass also prepared to follow his elder brother. In deference to the will of our sovereign, firm in our vows, we entered the dark and unknown forest. While that one of immeasurable effulgence was dwelling in the Dandaka Forest, I, his consort, was carried away by the Titan, Ravana of perverse soul. Two months is the time fixed by him, after which I am to die."