The exceedingly mighty son of Pavana, Hanuman, in order to increase Sita's confidence in him, again addressed her in reassuring words, saying:—
"O Fortunate One, I am a monkey, the messenger of the sagacious Rama; behold this precious ring on which his name is engraved! O Goddess, it was given to me by that magnanimous hero so that you should have faith in me. Take heart therefore, may good betide you! Soon shall there be an end to your grief!"
Then Janaki, taking the jewel that had adorned the finger of her lord, was overcome with joy, as if he himself were present. Her gentle countenance with its large eyes began to sparkle with delight resembling the moon released from Rahn's hold. Blushing with pleasure on receiving this token from her lord, that youthful woman, in her satisfaction, began to look on that great monkey as on a friend and paid tribute to him in the following wise:—
"O Foremost of Monkeys, verily you who have entered this city of Ravana's alone, art full of courage, valour and address. With admirable tenacity you have traversed the ocean, four hundred miles in breadth, the abode of great monsters, reducing it to the measure of a cow's hoof. I do not look on you as an ordinary monkey, O Lion among Forest Dwellers, since you dost not stand in awe of Ravana. O Best of Monkeys, you have merited associationship with me, since Rama die knower of Self has dispatched you as his messenger. It is certain that the invincible Rama would never have sent you to me without first testing your prowess. By good fortune the virtuous and truthful Rama as also the illustrious Lakshmana, enhancer of Sumitra's delight, are well, yet if Kakutstha live untouched by ill, how is it that he does not bum up the earth encircled by the sea in his wrath like the fires at the dissolution of the worlds? Those two heroes are able to subdue the Gods themselves and yet they refrain from action; I deem therefore that my sufferings are still not at an end! Is Rama not disquieted; is he not torn with anxiety on my account? Is that son of a king making every preparation to deliver me? Is he sorrowful and pre-occupied? Has he lost sight of his ultimate purpose; is he fulfilling his duty with fortitude? Is that slayer of his foes, desirous of victory, propitiating his friends with forbearance and gifts and employing the threefold means of dealing with his enemies? Does he show goodwill to his friends and have they confidence in him? Does he ally himself with those of good repute and do they pay him honour? Does that son of a king seek the favour of the Gods; does he depend on them for his power and fortune? Has Rama's affection for me decreased as a result of my living far from him? Will he deliver me from this peril? Is he not unstrung by this extreme misfortune, being accustomed to felicity and unused to adversity? Has he received frequent good tidings of Kaushalya, Sumitra and also Bharata? Is not Raghava, worthy of honour, overcome with grief at my absence? Is he reflecting on how he may rescue me? Will not Bharata, ever devoted to his brother, send out a great army led by experienced generals for my sake? O Foremost of Monkeys, will not the King of the Monkeys, the fortunate Sugriva, come to mine aid at the head of a host of valiant monkeys using their teeth and nails? Will not the heroic Lakshmana, the increaser of Sumitra's delight, skilled in the use of weapons, destroy the titans with his shafts? Shall I not see Rama strike down Ravana on the battlefield ere long with his friends and kinsfolk by means of Rudra's weapon? Is the golden countenance of Raghava, fragrant with the scent of lotuses, not dimmed under adversity, like a lotus deprived of water under the burning sun? Does he still retain his fixity of purpose, he who, for the sake of righteousness, without regret renounced the throne and on foot entered the forest with me? Neither for his mother nor his father nor for any other does he bear the love that he cherishes for me. I shall only live as long as I hear of him,"
Having addressed these words, full of meaning and sweetness to that monkey, that charming lady became silent so that she might hear more of her lord.
And listening to Sita, Maruti, of immeasurable prowess, with joined palms paid obeisance to her and spoke again, saying:
"O Illustrious Princess, the lotus-eyed Rama does not know that you are here and for this reason has not delivered you as Purandara rescued Saci. Learning this from me, Raghava will instantly come hither with his great army of bears and monkeys and, having triumphed over the invincible ocean, the abode of Varuna with his terrible shafts, Kakutstha will rid the city of Lanka of all the titans. Even if death himself or the Gods or the mighty titans seek to bar his passage, he will destroy them all. O Princess, in thine absence, Rama stricken with grief is no longer able to find rest, like an elephant who is attacked by a lion. O Goddess, I swear to you by the Mandara, Malava, Vindhya, Meru and Dardura Mountains and all the fruits and roots, that you shalt soon behold Rama's lovely countenance with his beautiful eyes, lips like unto the Bimba fruit, and charming earrings, who resembles the risen moon. Soon you shalt see Rama on Mount Prasravana, O Vaidehi, like Shatakratu seated on Airavata. Eschewing flesh and wine, Rama subsists on the fruits and roots of the forest alone, carefully prepared by Lakshmana of which he partakes at the fifth period of the day. So absorbed is he in the thought of you that he no longer drives away flies, insects and worms from his body. Sunk in his reflection, lost in grief, he is wholly absorbed in your contemplation. Rama, the foremost among men no longer sleeps but should his eyelids dose in weariness he starts up crying: 'O Sita!' in gentle accents. Whenever he beholds a fruit or flower or any other object dear to women, he sighs 'O My dear Love!'. O Goddess, that prince unceasingly calls on you, crying: 'O Sita', and in order find to you has resorted to every means."
Hearing Rama's praises, Sita was greatly delighted, but grieved also to learn of his pain so that she resembled the autumn moon entering a dark doud to re-appear once more.