Highly gratified by Sita's words, that lion among monkeys answered thus:—
"O Fair Lady of auspicious presence, you have spoken in accord with your feminine nature and with the modesty of one devoted to her lord! As a woman, it would not be possible for you to cross the sea, four hundred miles in width on my back and the plea that you have made, saying 'I may not touch the body of any save Rama' is worthy of you, O Goddess, consort of that magnanimous One. Who but you would utter such words, O Janaki? Truly Kakutstha shall hear from beginning to end all you have said and done in my presence, O Princess. For many reasons did I speak to you thus, O Lady, anxious as I was to compass Rama's design, and my heart troubled with feelings of affection. Further it was with great difficulty that I penetrated into the City of Lanka and traversed the ocean and debating what was meet for me to do, I addressed you in this wise. I wished to bring you back to the one who is the delight of the House of Raghu this day! It was my devotion for him and in regard for you, that I uttered those words. As, however, you are unable to come with me, O Irreproachable Lady, do you give me some token which will inspire Rama with faith in me."
Being thus addressed by Hanuman, Sita, who resembled the daughter of the Gods, answered him in faint accents, her voice broken with sobs:—"This is the most perfect token you canst take to my dear lord! Do you say this to him:—
'O Rama, when we formerly resided at the foot of the Cittra-kuta Mountain in the eastern region, not far distant from where the ascetics dwelt, in a place rich in roots, fruit and water near the river Mandakini, whilst ranging the flowery groves, redolent with fragrance, you, having sported in the lake, rested all dripping on my breast. At that moment a crow, approaching, sought to peck me and I threw a stone at it; nevertheless that ferocious devourer of offerings, determined to wound me, would not leave its prey and in my wrath I removed my girdle, in order to strike the bird and my robe slipped down. On seeing this, you didst laugh at me, whereat I blushed with shame and indignation. Harassed by that crow, who was wild with hunger, I took refuge with you, and exhausted, threw myself into thine arms as you were seated there. Though I was still vexed, you didst pacify me by your laughter and my face being bathed in tears, gently dried my eyes; thus I was seen by you, greatly enraged by the crow, O Lord. Exhausted, O Rama, I slept for a long time on your breast, and you in your turn, didst sleep on mine, O Elder Brother of Bharata. Then, as I awoke, that crow approached me once more and, as I rose from thine arms, tore my breast with its beak, O Raghava.
Thereupon, at the shedding of blood, you didst wake and beholding my breast lacerated, O Long-armed Hero, highly incensed and hissing like a serpent, you didst speak thus:—
"O You, whose thighs resemble the trunk of an elephant, who has wounded your breast? Who seeks to play with an angry five-headed serpent?"
"Thereafter, looking round, you didst perceive that crow, who, with sharp and bloody talons stood before me. That bird, prince of winged creatures, was the son of Indra and with the swiftness of the wind, it disappeared into the earth. Then you, O Long-armed Warrior, thine eyes rolling in fury, resolved to destroy that crow and, plucking a blade of kusha grass, from where you had lain, transformed it into Brahma's shaft and it burst into flame, like unto the fire of death before the bird. Hurling that fiery brand, it followed that bird high into the sky and, pursued by the fiery dart, the crow flew this way and that, thus traversing many regions and ranging through the Three Worlds, repulsed by his sire and the sages; at last it sought refuge with you, falling on the earth and beseeching mercy of you. Though worthy of death, you, O Kakutstha, ever willing to succour all beings, out of compassion, spared him.
Then, speaking unto the one who was exhausted and distressed, you didst say:—
"This weapon of Brahma may never remain ineffective, therefore say what is now to be done?"
Then the crow answered:—"I will give up my right eye," whereupon Ramacandra destroyed the right eye of that crow. Having sacrificed the right eye, his life was spared and, paying obeisance to Rama, as also to King Dasaratha, the crow, delivered by that warrior, returned to his abode. O You, who, on my behalf, didst discharge the Brahma-weapon, even at a crow, why dost you leave him who bore me away, unpunished? O Foremost of Men, show your compassion to me and inspire me with hope. I am conversant with your great energy, thine immense endurance, thine amazing strength, thine irresistible power unfettered by the limitations of time and space, incapable of being disturbed, you who art deep like the ocean, lord of the earth and the equal of Vasava himself! You, the first among bowmen, who art full of ardour, and courage, wherefore dost you not direct your weapons against the titans? Neither Nagas, Gandharvas, Gods nor Maruts can resist you in combat'.
"If that warrior still retains any regard for me, why does he not exterminate the titans with his whetted shafts, or why does not Lakshmana, the repressor of his foes, endowed with energy, deliver me at his brother's behest? Since those two tigers among men, equal to Vayu and Indra are invincible even against the Celestials, why do they disregard me?
"Alas! I must be guilty of some heinous sin, since those twin scourges of their foes, though able to do so, fail to come to my rescue!"
Hearing Vaidehi's piteous words, uttered with her eyes full of tears, the mighty Hanuman, foremost of the monkeys, said:—"O Exalted One, I swear to you that Rama's features are altered on account of the sorrow he feds for you and, seeing his brother overwhelmed with grief, Lakshmana too is filled with distress, this is the truth, O Goddess. Since I have now found you, there is no cause to lament further and you shalt soon see an end to your woes, O Lovdy One. Those two tigers among men, those princes of incalculable energy, in their eagerness to see you, will burn the worlds to ashes. Having slain that formidable warrior, Ravana with his kinsfolk, Raghava shall return with you to the palace.
"Now tell me what I shall say to Rama and Lakshmana, who are filled with valour and the illustrious Sugriva and all the assembled monkeys?"
Hanuman having uttered these words, Sita answered him saying
"Bowing low to that Lord of the World, enquire after the welfare of that protector of men, whom Kaushalya has brought forth and wish him all prosperity from me. Then offer salutations to the one of whom Sumitra is the happy mother, he, who renounced garlands, jewels, his beloved consort, the dominion of a vast realm hard to attain and his father and mother, after bidding them a tender farewell, in order to follow Rama. That virtuous prince, who, in his devotion, sacrificed unsurpassed felicity, accompanied his brother Kakutstha to the forest, watching over him; he who is great, wise and pleasing to look upon, possessing broad shoulders and who looks on Rama as his father and reverences me as his mother, that valiant Lakshmana, who did not know that I was being borne away. Full of deference for the aged, dignified and brave, measured in speech, the foremost of those dear unto that king's son and worthy of his father-in-law, he who even undertakes these tasks to which he is not equal, whose presence causes Rama to forget his sire, who is dearer to him than I; Lakshmana, the brother of Rama, to him do you offer obeisance from me and repeat my words to him. May that noble and virtuous one, beloved of Rama, ever mild and pure, bring an end to my sufferings, O Best of Monkeys! O Chief of the Monkeys, do you bring about the success of this undertaking. May Rama, on thine instigation, make a supreme effort on my behalf.
Further, do you repeat these words of mine again and again to him:—
"'I have but one month to live, O Son of Dasaratha! After that month I shall die; I swear to you that this is the truth I speak! Deliver me from the hands of that cruel and wicked Ravana, O Hero, as Kaushiki was delivered from hell'."
Saying this, Sita drew from her robe the pearl which formerly adorned her forehead, which shone with celestial radiance, and bestowing it on Hanuman, said: "Give this to Raghava."
Then the valiant Hanuman, taking the priceless jewel, placed it on his finger, it being too small for his arm and, that foremost of monkeys, having received the pearl, paid obeisance to Sita, circumambulating her from left to right. Filled with delight on having found the princess, Hanuman had already returned to Rama and Lakshmana in thought.
And taking that costly and superb ornament that the daughter of King Janaka had carried carefully concealed in her sari, Hanuman, as if delivered from a hurricane that had overtaken him on a high mountain, his heart full of serenity, once more prepared to set out on his return journey.