Having given the jewel to Hanuman, Sita said to him:—
"This token is well known to Raghava and seeing this pearl, the valiant Rama will call three people to mind, my mother, myself and King Dasaratha. O Best of Monkeys, your heroism being further stimulated by this enterprise, consider carefully what fresh efforts are needed; you are capable of undertaking this task, think therefore what course Rama should adopt to bring my misfortunes to an end. O Hanuman seek by thine exertions to terminate my sufferings!"
Thereupon the son of the Wind-god of immense energy, replied: "So be it," and making obeisance to Vaidehi, prepared to depart, but that exalted one, Videha's daughter, seeing Hanuman about to leave, her voice strangled with sobs, said unto him:—
"O Hanuman, do you communicate my desires for the happiness of Rama, Lakshmana, Sugriva, his ministers and all the other monkeys and, O Best of Monkeys, in consonance with righteousness, wish them well. It behoves you to do that which will cause the long-armed Rama to deliver me from the ocean of affliction in which I am plunged. O Hanuman, do you speak so that the illustrious Rama rescue me from here while I am yet alive and thereby reap the fruits of virtue. Listening to that which you shalt relate to him of me, that son of Dasaratha, ever filled with valour, will feel his daring increased a hundredfold in the thought of reunion with me. The heroic Rama, hearing the appeal I have charged you to deliver to him will be inspired to display increasing prowess."
Listening to Sita's words, Hanuman, born of Maruta, with joined palms, made answer to her saying:—
"Soon shall Kakutstha, surrounded by the foremost monkeys and bears, come, and vanquishing his enemies in fight, dispel your grief. I know of none among mortals, titans or Gods, who can withstand him when he discharges his arrows. Were you the price of victory, he would be able to challenge the Sun or Parjanya or Vaivasvata or Yama himself in conflict and would prepare to conquer the whole earth that is bounded by the sea, O Delight of Janaka."
Hearing these pleasing, true and sweetly expressed words, Janaki addressed Hanuman with respect, who had spoken out of devotion to his master, and said:—"O Hero, if you judgest it to be wise, then tarry here for one day more and, having rested in some hidden spot, set out to-morrow! Your presence, O Monkey, will cause me to forget my great misfortune awhile, I who have experienced so little happiness. But should you depart to-day, O Lion among Monkeys, my life will be in danger till your return, this is certain. Furthermore, not seeing you will prove an increased torment, afflicted as I am with grief and, O Hero, this doubt haunts me continually,—'How will that powerful King, in the midst of the forces of his monkeys and bears and those two sons of a monarch, cross the impassable ocean?' In all the worlds, three beings alone have the power to traverse the sea; Garuda, you and Maruta! In the face of this insurmountable obstacle, what means to success canst you see, O Most Skilled of Beings? Undoubtedly you are able to encompass this undertaking unaided, O Destroyer of Hostile Warriors but you alone wouldst then reap the glory. If Rama, however, together with his armies vanquished Ravana and, delivering me, returned to his own city, that exploit would be worthy of him. If, crossing the sea and besieging Lanka, that destroyer of hostile forces Kakutstha, bore me hence, he would have accomplished what is natural to him. Do you therefore act in such wise that that valiant warrior may be able to manifest his prowess!"
Hearing these words, fraught with sense and reason, full of affection, Hanuman replied mildly:—
"O Queen, the leader of the forces of bears and monkeys, Sugriva, full of energy, has resolved to liberate you. Surrounded by millions of monkeys, that destroyer of titans will come hither without delay. There are, under his command, monkeys endowed with valour, energy and extreme prowess, swift as thought, able to go upward or downward and to every side, nothing can impede their course, no task, however hard, defeats their immeasurable courage. Nay, more than once, by their amazing endurance, they have encircled the entire earth with its seas and mountains on every side, by resorting to the wind's path. Among those Rangers of the Woods, some are equal to me and some superior and, in the whole of Sugriva's company, there is none who is less so. Since I have reached this place, how much more are those valiant monkeys able to do so! Nor are the superior ones sent on errands but those of less account. O Queen, have no anxiety and abandon your grief; with a single bound, those foremost of monkeys will reach Lanka and those two brothers, resembling the sun and moon about to rise, will speed to your side, riding on my back. Having slain Ravana and his hordes, Raghava, the delight of the House of Raghu, will take hold of you, O Lady of Lovely Limbs, in order to bring you back to thine own city. Therefore let courage and happiness attend you, have faith in the dawning of that hour; ere long, you shalt behold Rama shining like a flame.
"That Indra of the Titans, his sons, counsellors and kinsfolk, being slain, you shalt be re-united with Rama as Shashanka with Rohini. Soon you shalt see the end of your woes, O Divine Maithili, and Ravana will fall under Rama's blows before thine eyes!"
Having thus sought to comfort Videha's daughter, Hanuman, born of Maruta, preparing to depart, spoke yet again, saying:—
"You shalt soon behold the destroyer of his foes, Raghava of subdued soul, as also Lakshmana, bearing his bow in his hand at the gates of Lanka. Ere long you shalt see those valiant monkeys, endowed with the courage of lions and tigers, resembling the lord of elephants, fighting with their nailsand teeth. O Noble One, innumerable companies of monkeys will be seen by you, resembling hills or clouds, roaring on the plateaus of Malaya and Lanka. Like an elephant attacked by a lion, Rama is deeply wounded by the formidable shafts of the God of Love! O Goddess, weep no more, but banish fear and sorrow from your heart; you shalt be reunited with your consort, O Beautiful One, as Saci was to Indra.
"Who can overcome Rama? Who is equal to Saumitri? Those two brothers, resembling the wind and fire, are your support. O Goddess, you shalt [now?] have to dwell long in this place inhabited by formidable titans; your beloved will not delay his coming; have patience till I return!"