Hearing the words of that magnanimous son of Vayu, Sita, who resembled a daughter of the Gods, replied in significant words, saying:—
"As the rain, ripening the grain, rejoices the earth, so am I gladdened on seeing you, O Monkey, who speaks sweetly of my beloved. In compassion for me, who am emaciated with suffering, do that which will enable me to meet with that tiger among men, soon.
O Foremost of Monkeys, call to his remembrance, that reed the crow destroyed in his anger, having been deprived of an eye and also how, when my tilaka mark was effaced, he painted another on my cheek, which he will surely remember. Say:
'O You who resemblest Indra, how, with your valour, canst you suffer Sita to be borne away and set in the midst of the titans? That celestial pearl which adorned my forehead, I have preserved with care. In my misfortunes, I have oft looked on it with delight as on thyself, O Irreproachable Hero! Yielding up this jewel, I shall not live long, being overwhelmed with grief. For your sake, O Rama, I endure insufferable misery and the menaces of the titans which cleave my heart! O Destroyer of your Foes, I shall live for one more month, after which, bereft of you, I shall yield up my life. The King of the Titans is a source of dread to me; if I learn that you dost hesitate in coming to mine aid, I shall instantly give up my life'."
Witnessing Vaidehi's tears and lamentations, the mighty Hanuman, born of Maruta, answered:—
"O Goddess, your misfortunes have rendered Rama's features wan, I swear to you this is the truth and seeing Rama overcome with sorrow, Lakshmana too is deeply distressed. Now that I have found you, there is no cause for despair! Soon, soon, you shalt see an end to your woes, O Lovely Princess 1 Those blameless princes, foremost of men, eager to see you, will reduce Lanka to ashes. Having slain Ravana in combat, those two scions of the House of Raghu will take you back to their own city, O Large-eyed Lady! O Irreproachable Damsel, it is now for you to give me such a token, that Rama will instantly recognise and that will delight his heart."
Sita answered:—"I have already furnished you with an excellent token. Seeing that jewel, Rama will instantly believe your words."
Receiving the marvellous pearl, the Prince of the Monkeys inclined his head to that exalted one and prepared to depart.
Beholding that foremost of monkeys expanding his form and, charged with energy, preparing to leap, her face bathed in tears, in a voice choked with sobs, Sita said to him:—
"O Hanuman, do not fail to offer my good wishes for their welfare to those two brothers, Rama and Lakshmana, who resemble two lions and to Sugriva also and his court. Do that which will cause the long-armed Raghava to deliver me from this ocean of affliction, where I am held prisoner. On your return, when you are near him, tell him of my harsh and bitter affliction and the threats of the titans! May prosperity attend you, O Chief of the Monkeys."
Having received these instructions from the princess, the monkey, his purpose accomplished, exceedingly exultant, reflecting that little remained for him to do, had already crossed the northern region in thought.