Having been honoured by Sita, the monkey, leaving that place, began to reflect on what little remained for him to do since he had discovered that dark-eyed Princess.
Dismissing the three means to success, the fourth now appeared to him as appropriate and he reflected in himself: "Because of their nature, one may not enter into negotiation with the titans nor do gifts avail with the wealthy; one is unable to sow dissension among those who are proud of their strength, there remains therefore prowess as applicable here. In these circumstances, valour is the only resource. When these titans see the foremost of their warriors fail in combat, their martial ardour will be subdued. He who accomplishes his main purpose and compasses innumerable other engagements without jeopardising the original enterprise, is a skilful messenger. He who employs all his resources to execute a minor task, has no sagacity, but the one who uses countless means with the minimum effort, is wise. Though my mission has been fulfilled, yet if, returning to the abode of the King of the Monkeys, I have ascertained the strength of the foe and ourselves in the field, I shall have truly carried out his commands. How shall I act so that my presence here proves fruitful? How can I provoke an encounter with the titans and what can I do so that that Ten-necked One will be made to measure his strength with mine own? Coming face to face with Dashagriva on the field accompanied by his counsellors, his army and charioteer, I shall easily read his intentions and then take my leave.
"I shall now proceed to lay waste this magnificent grove, resembling the Nandana Gardens, that ravishes the eye and where every variety of tree and creeper, is found, as the forest fire consumes the dead trees and this destruction will incite Ravana's fury. Thereafter the King of the Titans will call upon his immense army furnished with tridents and iron pikes, and the horsemen, chariots and elephants, of which it is composed, and a formidable struggle will ensue. Then I shall fight with all my strength against those titans and having defeated the assembled forces of Ravana, I shall return safely to the King of the Monkeys."
Thinking thus, Maruti, like a raging tempest, with immense energy began to root up the trees with his powerful and sinuous thighs, breaking them down, as also the creepers of that grove, where the trumpeting of maddened elephants could be heard.
With its trees uprooted, its foundations shattered, the crests of the hills broken away and all that was fair laid waste, the copper-tinted buds, the trees and creepers withering away, that grove appeared as if a fire had consumed it and the flowering sprays blown hither and thither, resembled women with their robes in disarray. With its grassy dells and charming pavilions ruined, tiger, deer and birds emitting cries of fear and the edifices crumbling, that great demesne was bereft of beauty. And that grove, belonging to the women of the inner apartments, where they were wont to sport, with its avenues of Ashoka trees and its creepers, now laid waste by that monkey, was transformed by him into a heap of ruins.
Then having given that powerful lord of the earth cause for severe displeasure, that monkey, eager to fight against those countless valiant titans single-handed, stationed himself at the gate, blazing with effulgence.