Meanwhile the cries of birds and the crash of falling trees, struck terror into the hearts of the inhabitants of Lanka. Wild beasts and birds fled hither and thither in terror on every side and inauspicious omens appeared.
Waking from sleep, those grim-visaged titan women beheld the grove devastated by that mighty and heroic monkey and, in order to inspire them with fear, that long-armed one, full of energy, began to increase in size and they, observing that immense ape, as high as a hill, of unimagined power, enquired of Janaka's daughter, saying:—
"Who is this being? From whence and wherefore has he come hither? Why did he converse with you? Tell us, O Large-eyed Lady, have no fear O Dark-eyed Lovely One."
Thereupon, the virtuous Sita, of faultless limbs, answered them saying:—"Since the titans are able to change their form at will, by what means should I be able to recognise them? You know what he is and what he is about 1 Without doubt, serpents know the secret of the serpent's tail! As for me, I am terrified nor do I know what he is but believe him to be a titan, who has come hither, able to change his form at will."
Hearing Vaidehi's words, the titan women fled with all speed, a few only remaining, whilst some hastened to inform Ravana of what had taken place.
Thereafter those female titans of hideous aspect, approached the King of the Titans and informed him of that monstrous and formidable monkey in the Ashoka grove, saying:—
"O King, there is a monkey of immense size, endowed with immeasurable strength, who, having held converse with Sita, remains there. We besought the daughter of Janaka whose eyes resemble a doe's, to inform us who this monkey was but she would not disclose it. It may be that he is an emissary of Indra or Kuvera or even of Rama himself, who is anxious to discover where Sita is. This being of strange aspect, has completely destroyed your wonderful pleasure garden that was filled with beasts of every kind. There is not a single quarter that has not been laid waste by him, save the place where the divine Janaki abides, whether to preserve her or for reasons of exhaustion, we know not, but since he is a stranger to fatigue, we deem it is on account of this woman. And the Ashoka tree, covered with buds and lovely foliage, under the shade of which Sita is sheltering, has been spared by him. It behoves you to inflict some severe penalty on this formidable being, who has held converse with Sita and destroyed the grove. O Lord of the Hosts of Titans, who would dare to converse with her for whom thine heart yearns without suffering death?"
Hearing the words of the demons, Ravana, the King of the Titans, his eyes rolling in rage, flamed up like a funeral pyre and, in his wrath tears fell from his eyes like drops of burning oil from a lighted lamp.
Then that mighty monarch ordered those titans named Kinkaras, whose strength equalled his own, to seize Hanuman whereupon eighty thousand of those retainers speedily issued from the palace, bearing maces and iron hooks in their hands. Possessing huge stomachs and large teeth, formidable to look upon, filled with valour and martial ardour, they were all burning to lay hold of that monkey. Approaching Hanuman who was standing at the gate ready to fight, those powerful titans rushed upon him like moths on a flame. Equipped with maces of different kinds and gold-encircled bracelets, with arrows bright as the sun, hammers, axes, spears, darts and lances, they surrounded Hanuman and began their attack. Then he, full of strength and courage, resembling a hill, lashing his tail, began to roar, waving it to and fro, and expanding in size, that son of the Wind-god filled Lanka with his bellowing. On account of the noise of the swishing of his tail and his roaring, the birds began to fall from the air and he proclaimed in a loud voice:—"Victory to the mighty Rama and the valiant Lakshmana! Victory to Sugriva, protected by Raghava! I am the servant of the Sovereign of Koshala, Rama, of imperishable exploits, I am Hanuman, the destroyer of hostile armies, the offspring of Maruta. A thousand Ravanas cannot stand before me in combat, when I crush them beneath a myriad trees and rocks! Under the very eyes of the titans, I shall destroy the City of Lanka and, paying obeisance to Maithili, depart, my purpose being accomplished I"
On hearing his shouts, the titans were seized with terror and they beheld him standing aloft like a great evening cloud and, knowing now that that monkey had been despatched by his master, under the command of their lord they began to assail him on all sides with every kind of formidable weapon.
Surrounded by those warriors, that mighty monkey seized hold of an iron bar that stood near the gate, and lifting it, struck those Rangers of the Night, and he appeared like Vinata's offspring carrying away a struggling serpent. Grasping the weapon, that valiant monkey began to destroy those demons, moving here and there in the air, as Indra of a thousand eyes crushed the Daityas with his thunderbolt.
Having slain the titans, that heroic and powerful son of Maruta, thirsting for combat, stationed himself at the gate.
Thereafter the few titans, who had escaped, informed Ravana of the destruction of his servants and, hearing that a mighty host of demons had been slain, the king, his eyes rolling in wrath, commanded the son of Prahasta, who was endowed with matchless courage, invincible in battle, to go forth.