Having slain the Kinkaras, Hanuman, reflecting awhile, thought to himself:—"I have laid waste the grove but I have not destroyed the sacred temple, I shall now demolish this sanctuary."
Thinking thus, the son of Maruta, displaying his prowess, bounded to the temple that was as high as the peak of Mount Meru, and scaling that edifice, that resembled a mountain, that chief of the monkeys, manifested a great effulgence, equal to the radiance of the sunrise. Thereafter he began to destroy that lofty sanctuary which shone with a glory equal to the Pariyatra Mountain. Assuming immense proportions, the illustrious son of Maruta, in his intrepidity, caused Lanka to tremble, filling it with his roaring and, at that terrifying and deafening clamour, the birds and the guardians of the temple, fell to the ground, their senses overcome.
Thereupon Hanuman cried out: "Victory to Rama, skilled in the use of weapons and to the courageous Lakshmana! Victory to King Sugriva, Rama's henchman! I am Hanuman, the destroyer of hostile armies, son of Maruta, and the servant of Rama, King of Koshala, of immortal exploits! When I hurl down trees and rocks, not even a thousand Ravanas can withstand me in combat. Having destroyed the City of Lanka and paid my obeisance to the daughter of the King of Mithila, my purpose fulfilled, I shall depart."
Having spoken thus, the colossal leader of the monkeys, standing on that edifice, emitted a roar and the hideous clamour struck terror into the hearts of the titans.
In consequence of that great tumult, a hundred temple guards sallied forth, bearing every kind of weapon, dart, scimitar, arrow and axe; and surrounding Maruti struck him with clubs and bars encircled with golden bands. Hurling themselves on that excellent monkey with arrows bright as the sun, that host of titans resembled a mighty whirlpool in the Ganges.
Thereat the son of the Wind, the mighty Hanuman, waxing wrath, taking on a formidable aspect and tearing up from that sanctuary a huge pillar plated with gold, which emitted a hundred rays, spun it round rapidly with great energy, so that the fire generated therefrom set the temple ablaze. Seeing that monument in flames, the leader of monkeys having despatched a hundred titans, resembled Indra slaying the demons with his thunderbolt and, standing in space, he cried out exultingly:—
"Thousands of leaders of monkeys, resembling myself, valiant and brave, are scouring the whole earth under Sugriva's command. Among these, some are as strong as elephants, others ten times as strong, some have the energy of a thousand elephants, some of a whole herd and some have the strength of the wind, while a few possess a strength that may not be measured. Such are the monkeys, armed with teeth and claws, that in hundreds and thousands and millions, will accompany Sugriva when he comes to exterminate you all. Then neither the city of Lanka nor any of you nor Ravana himself will survive, since they have incurred the wrath of that hero of the House of Ikshvaku."