Learning that the sons of his ministers had fallen under the blows of that great monkey, Ravana, with a darkened countenance, concealing his fears, formed a resolution which he deemed would prove decisive.
Thereupon Dashagriva commanded the leaders of his forces, Virupaksha, Yupaksha, Durdharsha, Praghasa and Basakama, masters of strategy, endowed with the speed of the wind, brave and skilful warriors, to take Hanuman captive, saying:—
"You Generals, who are full of valour, set out at the head of your troops with your fleet of horses, chariots and elephants and take this monkey prisoner. Approaching that dweller of the woods, exercise great circumspection and act with due consideration for time and place. Having regard to his conduct, I do not judge him to be a monkey, he being endowed with extraordinary prowess. I deem him to be a higher being and not a monkey; perchance he is an emissary created by Indra by virtue of his penances in order to destroy us. Under my command, you have all triumphed over Nagas, Yakshas, Gandharvas, Devas, Asuras and great Rishis; undoubtedly they are plotting some treachery against us, therefore seize this being by force. O Generals, let each go forth at the head of a mighty host, attended by horses, chariots and elephants and take this monkey prisoner. In former times I have seen monkeys endowed with immense energy, like Bali, Sugriva, the exceedingly powerful Jambavan, the General Nila and others, such as Dvivida, yet there was nothing alarming in their gait, their energy, their prowess, their intelligence, their conduct or their capacity to assume different forms, this, however, is some great being masquerading as a monkey. Even though the Three Worlds with Indra, the Gods, the titans and men cannot resist you on the field of battle, great efforts will be needed to lay hold of him. Nevertheless, even a seasoned warrior, desiring to triumph in combat, is not able to defend his life without exertion, for the outcome of a battle is uncertain."
Obedient to the commands of their lord, all those valiant titans, resplendent as fire, attended by their troops, threw themselves in all haste into their chariots with sharp and pointed weapons and on to their swift steeds and elephants maddened with ichor.
Then those warriors beheld that mighty monkey, shining like the sun that rises with its diadem of sparkling rays, and seeing him stationed at the gate, possessed of immense strength and speed, highly intelligent and brave, with his vast stature and huge arms, they were afraid and assailed him from all sides with their dreadful weapons.
Then Durdharsha discharged five white iron, and yellow pointed arrows at Hanuman's forehead, possessing the lustre of lotus petals, and his head being pierced with those shafts, that monkey leapt into the air making the ten cardinal points ring with his cry, whereupon that powerful and heroic warrior Durdharsha, standing in his chariot with his bow stretched, advanced, letting fly a hundred arrows at once. Thereupon, Hanuman, like unto the wind driving away clouds, intercepted those arrows while coursing in the sky, and sore beset by Durdharsha,the offspring of the Wind expanded in size, emitting loud roars, and thereafter, with a great bound swooped on the chariot of Durdharsha with extreme force, like a succession of lightning flashes striking a mountain. Thrown from his car, his eight steeds mangled, the pole and the shaft broken, that warrior fell to the earth, slain.
Then Virupaksha and Yupaksha, seeing him lying on the ground, waxing wrath sprang up and advanced on Hanuman dealing blows with their maces, striking the chest of that long-armed monkey as he stood in space; whereupon he meeting the shock of their assault, evaded their arrows and, that exceedingly powerful monkey, the son of Anila, swooped down on the earth like an eagle; thereafter seizing and uprooting a Sala tree, assailing those two titans with blows, that offspring of the Wind-god slew those two mighty and heroic demons.
Then learning that those three titans had been slain by the monkey, endowed with great swiftness, the courageous Praghasa rushed upon him laughing scornfully and the audacious Basakarna enraged, armed with a spear, also advanced towards him. Then each from his side attacked that lion among monkeys. Praghasa assailing him with a sharp-edged axe and Basakarna with his spear and, with his body streaming with blood, his limbs lacerated by their blows, that monkey, highly enraged looked like the rising sun.
Thereafter that heroic monkey, Hanuman, breaking off the peak of a mountain, together with its beasts, snakes and trees, crushed those titans, grinding them to dust; and having slain those five generals, that monkey proceeded to destroy the remaining host. As the Thousand-eyed Deity destroyed the Asuras, so did Hanuman, the horses with horses, the elephants with elephants, chariots with chariots, and warriors with warriors and the pathvays were choked with elephants, shattered chariots and the bodies of the titans. Having destroyed those heroic generals with their forces and vehicles, that hero, resembling Time, pausing at the destruction of the worlds, rested at the gate.