Hearing that those five generals with their forces and vehicles had been struck down by Hanuman, the King of the Titans glanced at the youthful Aksha, who full of martial ardour sat before him; and that impetuous warrior, armed with a bow inlaid with gold, responding to his glance, leapt up like a flame that blazes forth when fed with clarified butter by the foremost of sages in the sacrificial chamber.
And he ascended a chariot, acquired at the price of accumulated sacrifice, plated with refined gold, dressed with flags embroidered with pearls, yoked to eight steeds swift as thought, unconquerable by Gods or titans, surmounting every obstacle, flashing like lightning, of superb workmanship, able to travel through space, equipped with quivers, arrows, eight swords, darts and lances in orderly array, bound with golden ropes, shining with its myriad weapons, bearing golden garlands, rivalling the radiance of the sun and moon. Filling the firmament, the earth and its mountains with the sound of horses, elephants and great chariots, Aksha, at the head of his forces, advanced on that monkey, who was stationed on the gate.
Coming before that monkey, Aksha, with the gaze of a lion, in which admiration and respect were mingled, measured Hanuman with his glance, who resembled the fire at the dissolution of the worlds intent on destroying all creatures. Thereafter that mighty son of Ravana, reflecting on the exceeding valour of that monkey, his prowess in regards to the enemy and on his own strength, swelled up with pride and resembled the sun at the end of the world cycle. Then summoning up his courage, enraged, he took his stand resolutely in the field, and with concentrated mind challenged Hanuman, irresistible in combat and of unimaginable prowess, directing three whetted shafts upon him.
Observing that audacious monkey, indifferent to fatigue, accustomed to overcoming his foes and proud, Aksha took up his bow, holding his arrows in his hand. Wearing a corselet and bracelets of gold, with marvellous earrings, endowed with martial ardour, Aksha rushed on that monkey and a terrific struggle ensued which was unparalleled on earth and struck terror even in the Gods and titans. Witnessing that mighty conflict between the monkey and the youthful titan, the earth cried out, the sun ceased to pour down its warming rays, the wind no longer blew and the mountains shook; the whole firmament was filled with the sound and the ocean was convulsed. Then that hero, skilled in directing his aim, fixed his shafts and loosing them pierced that monkey in the forehead with three steel pointed winged arrows plated with gold and resembling venomous snakes.
Wounded by those murderous darts, his eyes blinded by the blood flowing from his brow, Hanuman resembled the rising sun, having arrows for its rays. Beholding that offspring of the foremost of monarchs with his splendid weapons upraised and his marvellous bow, that valiant counsellor of the Lord of the Monkeys rejoiced and in his ardour put forth his whole strength. Resembling the sun crowned with an aureole of rays as it rises over the peak of the Mandara Mountain, Hanuman, inflamed with ire, filled with strength and energy, consumed the youthful Aksha with his forces and vehicles by his fiery glances.
Thereupon that titan, from his bow equal unto Indra's charged with innumerable darts, let fall a mighty shower of arrows on the foremost of monkeys in the fight, as a cloud looses its waters on a lofty mountain.
Seeing the youthful Aksha on the field, seething with wrath and filled with valour, energy and strength, furnished with arrows, that monkey shouted aloud in exultation and, as an elephant draws near to a pit concealed in the grass, so did Aksha, in the inexperience of his youth, giving rein to his fury, proud of his valour, approach that incomparable warrior in conflict. Hanuman struck by those shafts, emitted a loud roar resembling a thunder cloud and, assuming a formidable aspect, full of vigour, agitating his legs and arms, churned up the air.
Leaping upwards, that valiant titan, raining arrows, hurled himself upon Hanuman and that foremost of titans, exceedingly skilled, greatest of car-warriors, Aksha, burning with courage, covered him with a hail of shafts, as a cloud covers the mountains with hailstones. Evading those arrows by darting between them, that heroic monkey, with the speed of the wind, swift as thought, began to range the path of the air. Casting glances full of pride on Aksha, who was armed with bow and arrows, burning to fight and, filling the sky with his countless excellent shafts, that offspring of the Windgod became thoughtful and his breast, pierced by the shafts of that youthful and powerful hero, he emitted a great shout. Recognising the skill of Aksha, he pondered on the warlike qualities of that warrior, reflecting:—
"This great and powerful warrior, like an infant sun in splendour, has accomplished deeds incapable of being performed by a boy; I am loath to slay one who has shown himself equal to every martial feat; he is high-souled, filled with valour, concentrated and able to endure extreme hardship in war, worthy of being honoured by the great Sages, Nagas and Yakshas; his strength and courage lend him a noble assurance and standing before me, he looks me straight in the eyes. Forsooth the heroism of this audacious being would shake the soul of the Gods and titans themselves. Verily he is an adversary not to be despised, his prowess increases as he fights; if I disregard him, he will defeat me, therefore I must destroy him for a spreading fire may not be neglected."
Reflecting thus on the strength of his foe and his own, that powerful one, endowed with energy, resolved to slay his adversary. Thereafter that valiant monkey, born of Pavana, coursing through the air, struck those eight excellent steeds of immense size capable of bearing a heavy burden in combat with the palm of his hand and, that great chariot, overturned by the blow administered by the counsellor of the King of the Monkeys, its pole shattered, the shafts riven, the steeds slain, fell to the earth from the sky.
Thereupon, abandoning his car, bearing his bow and sword, that warrior leapt into the air, as an ascetic consequent on his penances ascends to heaven on leaving the body.
Rising into the sky frequented by the King of the Birds, the wind and the Celestials, that monkey, with a single bound, seizing hold of his legs, as Garuda catches hold of a snake, with a strength equal to his sire's, spun him round and round and threw him violently on the earth. With his arms, thighs and chest crushed, vomiting blood, his bones and eyes pulverised, his joints dislocated, his sinews torn, he fell to earth slain by the Son of the Wind.
Thereupon that mighty monkey trod his rival underfoot, striking terror into the heart of the King of the Titans, and all the Rishis, Cakracaras, Bhutas, Yaks has, Pannagas and Suras assembled with their leader Indra, who gazed with wonder on the simian slayer of that youthful titan. And Hanuman, having destroyed the stripling Aksha, whose eyes were inflamed with blood on the field of battle, returned to the gate once more and waited there like Death at the time of the destruction of all creatures.