The youthful Aksha having been slain by Hanuman, Ravana, controlling his agitation, filled with anger, commanded Indrajita, who resembled a god, to take the field, saying:—
"You are the foremost of those bearing arms and hast afflicted even the Gods and Asuras in war; you are renowned among warriors and hast acquired divine weapons by the grace of Brahma; you are invincible in combat, even against the Maruts led by Indra himself. There is none in the Three Worlds who does not tire in battle, save you. You are preserved by your prowess in arms and your valour is your shield; being versed in the knowledge of time and place, you are exceedingly experienced and no feat is impossible for you to accomplish in the field, who art full of forethought; there is none in the Three Worlds but is conversant with thine austerities equal to mine own, as also your prowess and the strength of thine arms in combat, nay, depending on you, I have no anxiety regarding the outcome of the fray.
"In truth I did not put the same reliance on those who have succombed that I now place in you, O Destroyer of Your Foes, neither in the Kinkaras nor in Jambumalin, the son of my counsellor nor in the five generals going forth at the head of their troops with innumerable forces, accompanied by horses, elephants and chariots nor in the youthful, dearly beloved, Aksha, slain by that monkey. O Hero, you surpassest them all, therefore, reflecting on thine own strength, with all haste act in such a manner that the destruction of the army may be avoided. O Foremost of those bearing arms, considering thine own prowess and that of thine adversary, who now reposes quietly after creating carnage among these hostile hosts, act so that his might may be subdued. Powerful forces can serve no purpose here, for great armies flee before Hanuman nor do maces avail; the speed of Maruti is irresistible and, like unto Agni, he may not be slain by weapons. Therefore, revolving all these things in your mind and reflecting on the divine quality of your bow, with the intention of bringing about a successful issue, strive with determination to overcome your foe by frustrating his attacks. Assuredly it was not my will to expose you to this hazard, O Foremost among those endowed with intelligence, yet this course of action is approved by warriors and is in accord with the duty of kings. In war one must be versed in the traditions as also in the rules of military science in order to emerge triumphant from the struggle."
Hearing the words of his sire, Indrajita, whose prowess was equal to that of the son of Daksha, circumambulated him and inspired with martial ardour, prepared to fight. Overwhelmed with homage by his cherished companions, who had assembled there, he set out for battle. And the resplendent son of the King of the Titans, whose eyes resembled the petals of a lotus, bounded impetuously forward, like the ocean at the time of the full moon. Thereafter, Indrajita of matchless prowess, equal unto Indra, ascended his chariot, swift as the eagle or the wind, moving freely, drawn by four lions with pure white teeth.
Standing in his chariot, that most skilled of archers, fully conversant with the use of weapons, the foremost of warriors drove rapidly to where Hanuman was to be found.
Hearing the rumbling of wheels and the twanging of the bowstring, the delight of that monkey was redoubled, whereupon Indrajita, seizing his bow and steel-pointed arrows, versed in the art of warfare, proceeded towards Hanuman and as he advanced light-heartedly, his weapons in his hand, the four quarters grew dark and jackals set up a hideous howling. Nagas, Yakshas, Maharishis, Cakracaras and Siddhas assembled and the sky was filled with birds emitting piercing cries.
Seeing that chariot bearing down on him, the standard of Indra unfurled, that monkey raised a great shout and expanded his body; whereupon, Indrajita in his celestial car, drew back his marvellous bow, emitting a sound like thunder and those two powerful heroes closed in conflict, the monkey and the son of the King of the Titans, like unto God and demon.
Indifferent to danger they began to fight and that mighty monkey evaded the impetuous army of that valiant archer and consummate warrior in his great car, by executing a myriad evolutions in the air with indescribable agility. Thereupon, the heroic Indrajita, slayer of his foes, began to discharge his marvellous superbly-fashioned sharp steel-pointed and winged arrows, tipped with gold, swift as lightning. Hearing the rumbling of that chariot, the rolling of the drums together with the sound of the stretching of the bow, Hanuman leapt hither and thither and that mighty monkey, evading the rain of arrows, skilfully eluded that dexterious bowman, whose target he was, and stretching out his arms, Hanuman, the son of Anila, turning aside from those missiles, leapt into the sky. Thus those skilful and spirited warriors, exceedingly swift in motion and versed in the art of warfare, engaged in combat to the wonder of all beings. Nor was the titan able to take Hanuman unawares nor Maruti surprise Indrajita, as they hurled themselves on one another with a courage worthy of the Gods.
Observing him unscathed although the target of his infallible arrows, Indrajita, controlling his senses, engaged in profound concentration of thought on Hanuman, and finding him incapable of being slain, he began to consider how he could be bound fast and that most experienced of warriors, full of exceeding energy, discharged that powerful weapon conferred on him by Brahma on that illustrious monkey. Knowing him to be incapable of being slain, Indrajita, skilled in strategy, bound that offspring of the Wind-god with the aid of that weapon.
Struck by the titan with the Brahma-weapon, that monkey fell to the earth unconscious, but knowing himself to be bound by a shaft belonging to the Lord, he did not experience the least pain and though bereft of strength, that monkey bethought himself of Brahma's blessing. Then that heroic monkey began to recollect the boons conferred on him by Brahma and thinking of that weapon bestowed by the Self-create, consecrated by mantras, he reflected: "I may not release myself from these bonds in virtue of the power of that Guru of the World. Further, this subjugation has been ordained by Him and must be endured by me."
Thereupon, reflecting on the power of that weapon and the compassion of the Grandsire of the World towards him, also of the possibility of deli vet ance, that monkey submitted himself to Brahma's decree.
He thought: "Though made fast by this weapon, I experience no fear; the Grandsire of the World, Mahendra and Anila will protect me; in sooth I deem it to be to mine advantage to fall into the hands of the titans and thus come face to face with their great king, therefore let mine enemies take me captive!"
Having thus resolved, that destroyer of his foes, full of circumspection, lay motionless and being ruthlessly pinioned by the titans, he responded to their threats and abuses by leonine roars. Beholding that subduer of his foes lying motionless, the titans bound him with plaited ropes of hemp and bark and he willingly allowed himself to be tied and insulted by his foes in order that he might converse with the King of the Titans, should he, out of curiosity, desire to see him. Bound with ropes, the monkey was no longer under the sway of the Brahma-weapon, for, he being secured by other bonds, it was rendered void. Beholding that excellent monkey bound with bark, the valiant Indrajita recognised him to be freed from that supernatural weapon and became pensive, saying aloud:—
"Alas, those titans have rendered my exploit useless, not being conversant with the power of mantras and that Brahmaweapon being rendered void, no other is effective, thus we are all placed in a great predicament for this weapon may not be loosed twice."
Though delivered from the power of that weapon, Hanuman betrayed it by no sign, despite the suffering caused by the fetters that bound him and he allowed himself to be ill-treated by the titans and assaulted by those cruel demons who struck him with their fists and dragged him before Ravana. Freed from the Brahma-weapon, yet bound by hempen ropes, that powerful and heroic monkey was paraded by Indrajita before Ravana and his court. And those titans related to the king everything concerning that foremost of monkeys, who resembled a maddened elephant that has been bound.
On seeing the foremost of monkeys made captive, those warlike titans enquired saying:—"Who is this? Who has sent him? From whence has he come? What is his mission? Who are his supporters?" and others exclaimed angrily: "Kill him! Bum him 1 Devour him!"
Having come some way, Hanuman observed elderly attendants seated at the feet of their sovereign and he gazed with admiration on the palace decorated with gems.
Then the exceedingly powerful Ravana beheld that foremost of monkeys dragged hither and thither by those hideous titans, and Hanuman gazed at the Lord of the Titans, who was like unto a blazing sun in his might and glory.
Seeing Hanuman, that Ten-headed One issued orders to his chief ministers, distinguished for their lineage and character, who stood before him and commanded them to interrogate that monkey. Thereupon, questioned in turn by them concerning the purpose of his coming, Hanuman answered:—"I am a messenger, I come from King Sugriva."