Beholding that tawny-eyed one standing before him, the mighty-armed Ravana, the terror of the worlds, was seized with violent rage. Gazing on that lion among monkeys radiating splendour, his mind filled with apprehension, he reflected:—
"Is this the blessed Nandi, who has come hither, he who formerly cursed me when, on Mount Kailasha, he became the object of my mockery? Or is he perchance Vana Bali's son in the form of a monkey."
His eyes red with anger, the king then addressed the foremost of his counsellors, Prahasta, in words that were opportune and fraught with good sense, saying:—
"Demand of this perverse wretch, whence he has come, for what reason he laid waste the grove and why he slew the titans? What is his purpose in entering this impregnable citadel and why did he attack my retainers? Interrogate this scoundrel concerning these matters!"
At these words of Ravana, Prahasta said to Hanuman:—"O Monkey, be of good courage, you have nought to fear! If it be Indra who has sent you to Ravana's abode, tells us frankly! Have no anxiety, you shalt be liberated! If you are from Vaishravana, Yama or Varuna and have penetrated into our city disguising your real form or if you have been dispatched by Vishnu, hungry for conquest, then tell us. Your form alone is that of a monkey, not your prowess. Unfold all this unto us faithfully, O Monkey and you shalt instantly regain your freedom but if you liest, you shalt pay for it with your life! Therefore tell us why you have entered Ravana's abode."
Thus addressed, the foremost of monkeys answered the Lord of the Titans, saying:—
"I am not from Shakra nor Yama nor Varuna nor am I allied to Kuvera nor am I sent by Vishnu. I am truly a monkey as I appear to be, who have come here in order to behold the King of the Titans and for this purpose I destroyed the grove. To preserve my life I fought with the titans who, full of valour, presented themselves before me. Neither weapons nor chains can subdue me, even those of the Gods and titans themselves, I having received this boon from the Grandsire of the World. It was because I desired to see the king that I suffered myself to be overcome by the Brahmaweapon. Though I was not under the spell of that weapon, yet I permitted the titans to capture me in order to further Rama's design for which purpose I have entered the king's presence. Knowing me to be the messenger of Raghava, whose power is limitless, listen to my words, which will prove to thine advantage, O Lord."