Seeing the mighty ten-headed Ravana, that intrepid monkey addressed him fearlessly, in words fraught with penetration, saying:—
"I have come here at the command of Sugriva, O Lord of the Titans I As a brother, that Sovereign of the Monkeys offers salutations to you. Hear the counsel of a brother, the magnanimous Sugriva; his words are in accord with justice, advantageous and salutary both in this world and hereafter.
King Dasaratha, the master of chariots, elephants and horses, in splendour equal to Indra, was the friend of all and like unto a father to his subjects. His eldest son, mighty-armed, the darling of his sire, at his command, entered the Dandaka Forest with his brother Lakshmana and his consort Sita. His name is Rama and he is exceedingly valiant and ever abides in the path of virtue. His faithful consort, Sita, the illustrious daughter of the high-souled Janaka, King of Videha, vanished in the forest of Janasthana. Seeking for that princess, the king's son with his younger brother came to Rishyamuka and met with Sugriva. That King of the Monkeys promised to undertake the search for Sita and Rama agreed to aid him in recovering the monkey kingdom. Thereupon, slaying Bali in combat, that king's son established Sugriva on the throne, as lord of all the bears and monkeys. Bali, that bull among monkeys, formerly known to you, was slain by Rama with a single arrow in the fight, whereupon the Lord of the Monkeys, Sugriva, true to his vow, eager to find Sita, dispatched monkeys in all directions. Hundreds, thousands and millions of monkeys are exploring every region high and low, even up to the heavens and some resemble Vainataya and some the wind and those highly energetic monkeys course hither and thither without rest, incapable of being stayed. I am named Hanuman, the beloved son of Maruta and, in order to find Sita, I have crossed four hundred miles of sea. Having passed over the ocean, wandering through your palace, I observed Janaka's daughter.
"It does not become you, who art conversant with what is meet and proper and hast enriched thyself by your penances, to bear away another's wife, O Eminently Sagacious One. Intelligent beings, such as you, should not commit acts prohibited by the law of righteousness which lead to ruin 1 Who, even among the Gods and titans, can withstand the shafts loosed by Lakshmana or those of Raghava in his wrath? Nay, in the Three Worlds, there is none who may affront Rama with impunity. Following the path of duty and profit, do you ponder these words fraught with advantage to you in the three divisions of time and restore Janaki to Rama, that lion among men!
"I have seen Sita and achieved that which was difficult to compass, as for what remaines to be done, Rama himself shall accomplish it. I have beheld her in thine abode, suffering grievously; you are seemingly unaware that you harbourest a five-headed serpent in your mansion. Even as food mixed with poison may not be digested even by Gods or titans, so is she. It is not worthy of you to bring to nought that merit acquired by extreme mortification, as also a long and prosperous life. You deemest thyself by your penances, to have won immunity from death even from Gods, Immortals or titans, but Sugriva is neither a God nor an Immortal nor a titan. Raghava, O King, is a mortal and Sugriva, the Lord of Monkeys, therefore how will you preserve your life? The fruits of virtue do not blend with those of vice nor does equity destroy iniquity, Till to-day you have plucked the fruit of your merits but soon you will reap the fruit of thine evil deeds. Having learnt of the destruction of Janasthana, the death of Bali and the alliance of Rama and Sugriva; ponder on these things to thine own advantage. I am undoubtedly able to destroy Lanka with its horses, chariots and elephants single-handed yet I have not received the mandate to do so. In the presence of the troops of monkeys and bears, Rama vowed to slay his foes, those who bore Sita away. Assuredly, in doing injury to Rama, even Indra himself could not dwell in peace, how much less one like you. This Sita, who is known to you and who stays in thine abode is the night of death that will bring about thine end and that of Lanka. Beware of placing your neck in the noose of death in the form of Sita. Consider how you mayest save thyself. You shalt behold this marvellous city with its palaces and highways consumed by Sita's power and the flames fed by Rama's wrath. Do not therefore abandon friends, ministers, kinsfolk, brothers, sons, servants, wives and Lanka to this fate. O Indra among Titans, follow this good counsel since it is offered to you by one who is a monkey, the servant and messenger of Rama.
"Having wholly annihilated the worlds and their inhabitants with all that moves or does not move, the illustrious Raghava could re-create them all. Among the chiefs of the Gods, Titans, Yakshas, Danavas, Nagas, Vidyadharas, Gandharvas, wild beasts, Siddhas Kinneras or birds, in no way nor anywhere, at no time, among any beings, has any been found, who could stand against Rama whose valour is equal to Vishnu's. Since you have offered that lion among kings, Rama, this affront, your life is forfeit!
"Devas, Daityas, Gandharvas, Vidyadharas, Nagas and Yakshas are all unable to hold their own in combat with Rama, the Protector of the Three Worlds, O King of the Titans! Even were it the Four-headed Brahma, Svyambhu Himself or the Three-eyed Rudra, the destroyer of Tripura, or the mighty Indra, Chief of the Gods, not one of them could withstand Raghava in the field."
Hearing this distasteful yet excellent speech of that bold and fearless monkey, the Ten-Necked One, his eyes rolling in anger, ordered him to be put to death.