Hearing the words of his high-souled brother, spoken in consonance with time and place, Dashagriva answered him saying:—
"You have spoken truly, the slaying of a messenger is to be deprecated, it is therefore necessary to inflict some punishment other than death on him. In the case of monkeys, the tail is unquestionably the most cherished embellishment, therefore let it be set on fire and, having been burnt let him go, whereafter his friends, kinsfolk and allies as all those dear to him shall behold him degraded and mutilated."
Then the Lord of the Titans issued this command: "With his tail in flames, let him be led through the city of Lanka and its highways."
Hearing his words, the titans in their savage fury began to wrap the tail of Hanuman in cotton rags and thus swathed, that colossal monkey increased in size like unto a fire in a forest fed by dry wood. And having soaked the cloths in oil, the titans set them on fire and Hanuman, filled with rage and indignation, his face shining like the rising sun, lashed out at them with his blazing tail, whereupon that lion among monkeys was secured more tightly by the assembled demons. Accompanied by women, children and the aged, those rangers of the night gathered to enjoy the spectacle and the valiant Hanuman, who was bound, began to reflect on the matter and thought to himself:—
"Assuredly, though fettered, the titans are not able to prevent me from breaking my bonds and leaping amongst them creating fresh carnage, still it is in the interest of my master that I have taken this journey and it is under the orders of their lord that they have bound me, I shall not therefore resist them. From the point of view of stature, I am well able to engage all these titans in battle but for love of Rama I shall suffer this outrage. I shall survey Lanka anew, since during the night I was not able to view the fortifications, it proving too difficult. The night having passed I shall behold Lanka by day. Let them bind me anew; even though they inflict pain on me by the burning of my tail, my mind is not troubled."
Meanwhile the titans seizing hold of that great monkey of formidable aspect who was full of courage, an elephant among apes, exultant, advanced joyfully, proclaiming his misdeeds with conches and trumpets and those demons of cruel exploits dragged Hanuman, the conqueror of his foes, through the city, he willingly submitting himself to them.
Thereupon, passing through the titan's capital, that great monkey surveyed those marvellous palaces, covered highways, well laid out squares and streets flanked with mansions and cross roads, lanes and alleys, as also the interior of the dwellings and on the terraces and roads and along the royal highways all those titans cried out: "This is a spy!"
Then those hideous titan women informed the divine Sita of these unpleasant tidings, saying:—"O Sita, that red-faced monkey, who had converse with you, is being led through the streets, his tail ablaze." And hearing those words, Vaidehi remembering her own abduction, overcome with grief, having duly purified herself, called upon that God who nourishes himself on the sacrifices and urgently implored him to show his favour to that mighty monkey. And the large-eyed Sita, standing before the fire said: "If I am possessed of true devotion to my lord and have practised penances, if I have been a chaste wife, then do you prove cool to this monkey. If the sagacious Rama still has any compassion for me, if my merits are not wholly exhausted, then do not bum Hanuman."
Whereupon Anala of ardent rays, as if communicating with that lady, whose eyes were like a doe's, blazed up and, at the same time, Hanuman's sire, in order to please that goddess, blew on that flaming tail with ice-cold breath and the monkey, whose tail was ablaze, thought:—"How is it that this fire, blazing up, does not burn me? I see a great flame, yet feel no pain, even as if the snow had fallen upon it. In sooth this is a wonder due to Rama's power which I witnessed when crossing the main. If the ocean and the virtuous Mainaka acted in such a manner, in reverence for him, what will the God of Fire not do? It is on account of Sita's virtue, Raghava's power and my sire's affection for me, that Pavaka does not burn me."
Thereafter that elephant among monkeys reflected:—"Why should a warrior such as I, suffer himself to be bound by these vile titans? It is meet that I should manifest my valour and avenge myself!"
Then that impetuous and mighty monkey snapped his bonds and springing into the air uttered a shout and that offspring of the Wind-god reached the gate of the city which was as high as the peak of a mountain and where no titans were to be found. Then, he who resembled a great hill, assumed a diminutive form and casting off his fetters became free, whereupon he expanded to the size of a mountain once more. Looking about him he observed an iron bar lying at the gate and the long-armed Maruti, seizing hold of that weapon, employed it for slaying the guards. Having destroyed them, in his ardour, that one of exceeding prowess, with the burning plume of his tail resembling an aureole, looking like the glorious sun surrounded by rays, cast his eyes over Lanka.
