Seeing Lanka consumed by fire and that city with its terror-stricken titans filled with tumult, the monkey Hanuman became thoughtful and a great anxiety invaded his mind.
He reflected:—"In burning Lanka, I have without doubt done something reprehensible! Blessed are those great souls, who, in their wisdom extinguish the anger born within them as a fire is quenched by water. What evil is not committed by those who give way to wrath? In anger one may even slay one's spiritual preceptor; nor does he who is enraged, refrain from affronting virtuous men. He who gives way to wrath is unable to discriminate as to when it is fitting to speak or when to be silent; there is no iniquity that cannot be perpetrated by him. He is truly said to be a man, who, controlling himself, subdues the anger rising within him as a snake casts off its slough. Woe is me, wretched and shameless doer of evil that I am, who, forgetting Sita, have slain my lord by fire. Should that noble daughter of Janaka have perished in this conflagration, which has wholly consumed the city of Lanka, I have frustrated the purpose of my master; Sita having been burnt, I have marred my lord's design. To burn down Lanka is a trifling occurrence, but suffering myself to be overcome by anger I have cut at the very root of my mission. Assuredly Janaki has perished for there remains no corner of Lanka that has not been laid waste, the entire city lies in ashes. Since I have sacrified everything through my lack of understanding, I shall yield up my life this instant, either I shall throw myself into the fire or into the jaws of Vadava, or give my body to the denizens of the deep. Living, I am not able to face the King of the Monkeys or those two tigers among men, having marred their purpose. Through my culpable anger I have manifested my undisciplined simian nature to the Three Worlds. Woe to the unbridled passion, uncurbed and unrestrained, under which I failed to protect Sita when it was in my power to do so. She, having perished, those two heroes will die also and on their ceasing to exist, Sugriva will yield up his life with all his kinsfolk. On hearing these tidings, how shall the virtuous Bharata, devoted to his brother or Shatrughna, survive? Then on the extinction of the illustrious race of Ikshvaku, their subjects will be overcome with grief.
"Unfortunate am I, whose merits have been annulled through being false to the ties of duty and advantage, suffering myself to be dominated by a corrupting passion, thus becoming the destroyer of creatures!"
Immersed in these melancholy reflections, Hanuman recollected certain auspicious signs that he had previously observed and said to himself:—
"Is it possible that that Lovely One, protected by her own spiritual merit, has happily escaped death? Fire cannot bum fire! Nay, Pavaka would not dare to approach that virtuous one, preserved by her own purity, who is the consort of one of immeasurable glory. That Bearer of Sacrificial Offerings has not burned me owing to Rama's power and the virtue of Vaidehi. How should she therefore, the object of worship of those three brothers, Bharata and the others and the beloved of Rama's heart, perish? Since it is the nature of fire to bum, he who reigns invincible as master everywhere yet who has not burned my tail, why should he consume that exalted One?"
Thereafter Hanuman remembered with wonder how the Mainaka hill had appeared to him in the ocean and he reflected: "By virtue of her asceticism, sincerity and undeviating devotion to her lord, she is able to consume fire itself but it cannot consume her."
Pondering thus on the magnitude of the divine Sita's spiritual merit, Hanuman heard the high-souled Caranas conversing thus:—
"Assuredly Hanuman has accomplished a difficult feat in igniting a fierce and terrible fire in the dwellings of the titans. The hosts of women, children and the aged are fleeing away and the tumult re-echoes as in a cavern; the city of Lanka with its towers, walls and gateways is wholly consumed but Janaki still lives, a great wonder!"
Such were the words, resembling ambrosia, which fell on Hanuman's ears and from that instant, happiness flooded his heart once more. On account of the auspicious portents, his own conclusions, the merits of Sita and the words of the saints, Hanuman was delighted beyond measure. Thereupon that monkey, having attained his end, knowing the princess to be safe, resolved to leave Lanka after seeing her once more.