Like a winged mountain, with one impetuous bound, Hanuman sailed over the airy sea, whose serpents were the Yakshas and the full-blown lotuses; the Gandharvas the moon was the lily on those enchanting waters, the sun its waterfowl, Tishya and Shravana its swans and the clouds its reeds and moss; Pumavasu was the whale and Lohitanga the crocodile; Airavata the spacious island; Swati, its decoration in the form of a swan; the breezes were its billows and the rays of the moon its cool and peaceful waves.
Unwearyingly, Hanuman swallowing up that space adorned with the sun and stars, skimmed past the King of the Planets. Cleaving the clouds and crossing that ocean without fatigue, he beheld great masses of cloud, white, roseate, purple, blue, yellow and black, looking exceedingly beautifiil and he, entering and re-emerging from them, looked like the moon, when it is lost to sight and becomes visible again. Coursing through those massed clouds in his white attire, that hero could at times be seen and again was hidden in the sky, like unto the moon. Borne through space, that son of the Wind constantly dispersed the groups of clouds, sailing on and on, emitting loud roars resembling thunder and, having slain the titans, rendered his name famous, laid the city of Lanka waste, harassed Ravana, inflicted defeat on those mighty warriors and paid homage to Vaidehi, he was now returning full of glory, across the sea.
And that one endowed with prowess, paid homage to the foremost of mountains, Mainaka, as he sped on like an arrow loosed from the bowstring. Approaching from afar, he observed that lofty Mountain Mahendra, like a great cloud and that mighty monkey, having a lusty voice resembling thunder, filled the ten cardinal points with his roars.
Reaching the southern shore, eager to see his friends once again, he began to wave his tail to and fro and emit loud cries and as he proceeded in the path of Supama, the clamour rent the skies and it appeared as if the firmament and the sun's disc were shattered.
Thereupon those mighty warriors on the northern shore of the ocean, anxiously awaiting the Wind-god's offspring, heard the sound created by the thighs of Hanuman proceeding at great speed, resembling clouds blown by the wind and those rangers of the woods, who had been dispirited, heard the roars of that monkey which were like unto thunder. Hearing that clamour raised by Hanuman, those monkeys who were eager to see their friend once again, were greatly excited and Jambavan, the foremost of the monkeys, his heart exultant, addressing them all, spoke thus:—
"Undoubtedly Hanuman has been wholly successful in his enterprise; if it were not so he would not have raised this clamour."
Thereupon the monkeys, hearing the violent movements of that magnanimous one, as also bis shouts, highly delighted, leapt up and in their joy, bounding from rock to rock and from crest to crest, eager to behold Hanuman, climbed to the tops of the trees waving their clean apparel.
And the roaring of the mighty Hanuman, born of Maruta, resembled the wind whistling through a mountain gorge. Seeing that great ape, who, alighting, shone like a mass of clouds, all the monkeys stood before him with joined palms, whereupon that valiant monkey, high as a hill, leapt down on to the Mahendra Mountain covered with trees and, overflowing with felicity, he alighted on that lofty and enchanting peak, like a winged hill, whose pinions have been dipt and who has fallen from the sky.
Then instantly all the monkeys with glad hearts began to gather round the magnanimous Hanuman, encircling him, their faces shining with joy, drawing near to him in the excess of their felicity. Then offering obeisance to him they brought roots and fruits to that greatest of monkeys, born of Maruta. In their delight, some emitted shouts of joy and the foremost of the monkeys brought branches of trees so that he might be seated.
Meanwhile that mighty ape, Hanuman, paid obeisance to his elders and the aged with Jambavan at their head, as wdl as Prince Angada. And honoured by them all, as he had merited to be and overwhelmed by courtesies, he informed them briefly:—"I have seen the Goddess!" Then taking the hand of Bali's son, he sat down in the enchanting grove on the Mahendra Mountain and, questioned by them, he joyfully addressed those foremost of monkeys, saying:—
"In the midst of the Ashoka grove, I observed Janaki; that irreproachable one is guarded by dreadful titan women. That damsel is wearing a single plait of hair and constantly sighs for Rama's presence. She is faint on account of fasting, stained with dust, emaciated, and wears matted locks."
Those foremost of monkeys, hearing the words of Maruti: "I have seen her", sweet as Amrita, intoxicated with joy began to shout and emitting cries of pleasure raised ululations. Some waved their tails to and fro, others raised them up lashing them or bounded to the summit and with delight touched the fortunate Hanuman, that chief of monkeys.
And when Hanuman had spoken, Angada, in the midst of those valiant monkeys, paid tribute to Hanuman in excellent words, saying:—
"For valour and courage you have no equal, O Monkey, since you have crossed the immense ocean and hast now returned. You alone hast given us back our lives, O Great One. By your grace, our purpose accomplished, we can rejoin Raghava. O What devotion you have shown to your master 1 What prowess I What endurance! By the grace of heaven, you have seen the divine and glorious consort of Rama. By the grace of heaven, Kakutstha will abandon the grief that Sita's absence has caused him!"
Thereafter, surrounding Angada, Hanuman and Jambavan, the monkeys full of joy brought large rocks and, seated thereon, eager to hear how he had crossed the main and seen Lanka, Sita and Ravana, they waited with joined palms, their eyes fixed on Maruti.
And the youthful Angada, surrounded by innumerable monkeys, resembled the Chief of the Gods enthroned in heaven amidst the myriad hosts.
When the glorious and renowned Hanuman with the illustrious Angada, who was adorned with bracelets were seated, that elevated and mighty peak shone with splendour.