Thereafter, on the summit of Mount Mahendra, those monkeys, their eyes fixed on the mighty Hanuman were filled with delight and when all those high-souled and happy monkeys were seated, Jambavan, glad at heart, enquired of the great and fortunate offspring of the Wind concerning the success of his mission, saying:—
"How didst you discover that noble lady; how does she fare there; how does that cruel Ten-headed One bear himself towards her? Do you truthfully relate all this unto us, O Mighty Monkey!
"How wast you able to trace the divine Sita? What did she reply to thine enquiries? Having learnt all, we can take counsel as to what should be done! Do you tell us also what, on our return, we should say and what we should conceal, O You who art well able to subdue thyself!"
Thereupon, that messenger, his hair standing on end with joy on hearing these words, inclining his head in token of his reverence for Sita, answered:—
"In your presence I leapt from the summit of the Mahendra Mountain into space with a concentrated mind, desirous of reaching the southern shore of the sea. In my course, a formidable obstacle presented itself to my view and I beheld a great mountain having a golden peak, divine and splendid, which obstructed my path. Approaching the sun-like summit of that mighty mountain, reflecting: 'I will shatter this', I struck it with my tail and that peak which shone like the sun, broke into a thousand fragments.
Seeing its condition, that great mountain addressed me in sweet accents, bringing as it were refreshment to my soul, and said:
"'Know me, O My Son, to be the brother of your father Matarishvat, famed as Mainaka, dwelling in the deep. Formerly, all the larger mountains were furnished with wings and ranged over the earth causing devastation everywhere. Hearing of the conduct of those mountains, Mahendra, that blessed One, by whom Paka was chastised, with his thunderbolt severed the wings of those mountains by thousands but I was delivered by thine illustrious sire and that high-souled Wind-god cast me into the sea, the abode of Varuna. O Subduer of your Foes, I am willing to render assistance to Raghava, Rama is the foremost among virtuous men and is as powerful as Mahendra himself'.
"Hearing the words of the magnanimous Mainaka, I confided my purpose to him and he gave me leave to depart. Then, counselling me to proceed, he vanished in his human form and in the shape of a mountain became submerged in the sea.
"For a long time I travelled onward with speed till I observed the divine Surasa, Mother of Serpents, in the midst of the ocean and that Goddess addressed me saying:—
"'You are destined by the Celestials to be my food, O Best of Monkeys, I am about to devour you since you have been assigned to me'.
"Hearing this, I, with humility, turning pale, made obeisance to her with joined palms and uttered these words:—
"'Rama, the fortunate son of Dasaratha, the Scourge of his Foes, withdrew to the Dandaka Forest with his brother Lakshmana and Sita; his consort was borne away by the wicked Ravana; I am proceeding to her on Rama's behest. In this matter you should assist Rama. Having seen Mithila's daughter as also her lord of imperishable exploits, I shall return and enter your mouth, this I promise you'.
"Thus accosted by me, Surasa, able to change her form at will, said:
'None is able to pass by me, this is the boon I have received'.
"Thus addressed by Surasa, I attained the magnitude of ten yojanas and then another ten, but her mouth assumed even greater proportions. Seeing her jaws thus dilated, I instantly assumed a tiny form measuring a thumb's size and quickly entered her mouth, emerging immediately, whereupon the divine Surasa, taking on her normal shape, said to me:—
"'O Best of Monkeys, O Dear One, go, accomplish your mission and restore Vaidehi to the magnanimous Rama. Be you blessed, O Mighty One! I am pleased with you!'
"Then all beings praised me saying: 'Excellent! Excellent!' and I again leapt into the infinite blue like unto Garuda, when suddenly, without anything being visible, my shadow was held fast. Stayed in my course, I surveyed the ten cardinal points unable to discover who held me prisoner.
Then the thought came to me:
'What is this obstacle that has risen in my path? I cannot discern its nature!'
And as I looked down bewildered, I beheld a dreadful demon lying in the waves, thereupon that monster, laughing scornfully, addressed these inauspicious words to me, who though undaunted, remained motionless:—
"'Whither art you bound, O You of gigantic form? Do you become my food, who am hungry, and gratify this body deprived of sustenance for a long period.'
Saying:—'Be it so' I expanded my body to more than the capacity of her mouth but she increased the size of her huge and dreadful jaws in order to swallow me nor could she comprehend that I was able to assume different shapes at will. In the twinkling of an eye, abandoning my vast size, I, extracting her heart, flew into the sky.
"Throwing up her arms, that cruel demon sank under the salty waves like a mountain, whereupon I heard the harmonious voices of those magnanimous beings stationed in the air, saying:—
'That dreadful demon Sinhika has been swiftly slain by Hanuman.'
"That monster destroyed, I recalled to mind the urgency of my mission, and the delay that had occurred in discharging it and, after traversing a great distance, I beheld the southern shore of the ocean and the mountain on which Lanka was situated. The sun having set, I penetrated the abode of the titans unnoticed by them and, as I did so, a woman resembling the clouds at the end of the world period rose before me, breaking into laughter.
Striking that exceedingly dreadful form, having flames for her hair, who had sought to take my life, with my left fist I thrust her aside and entered there at dusk, whereupon that one, affrighted, addressed me saying:—
'I am the city of Lanka, O Warrior! Vanquished have I been by your prowess, you shalt also triumph over all the titans!'
"Meanwhile I sought for Janaka's daughter all through the night, penetrating into Ravana's inner apartments, but did not find her there. Not finding Sita in Ravana's palace, I was submerged in a sea of sorrow and in the midst of my distress I saw an enchanting grove with a mansion surrounded by a lofty golden wall. Having scaled that enclosure I beheld a grove of Ashoka trees in the midst of which a great Shimshapa grew. Ascending it, I observed a thicket of golden aspens and hard by the Shimshapa tree, I beheld that supremely beautiful one, dark blue of hue, whose eyes resembled lotus petals, clad in a single piece of cloth. Emaciated with fasting, her hair soiled with dust, Sita, fixed in devotion to her lord, was surrounded by cruel and hideous titan women living on blood and flesh, as a doe encircled by tigresses. Wearing a single plait, absorbed in the thought of her lord, lying on the earth, her limbs wasted, she resembled a lotus at the advent of winter. Deprived by Ravana of the object of her desire, she had resolved to die.
"Beholding that lady, whose eyes resembled a doe's, the illustrious consort of Rama, I remained seated in the Shimshapa tree.
"Thereafter I heard a great clamour mixed with the jingling of girdles and anklets, issuing from the palace of Ravana and, exceedingly agitated, contracting my body, I concealed myself like a bird in the thick foliage of the Shimshapa tree. Thereupon the mighty Ravana accompanied by his consorts came to the place where Sita was and, seeing the Lord of the Titans, Janaki of lovely hips, shrank into herself, concealing her breasts with her arms and, in great dread and extreme confusion, glancing here and there and finding no refuge, that unfortunate being was seized with violent trembling.
"Then Dashagriva, inclining his head, bowed to the feet of the princess, who was overcome with extreme grief and said to her:—
"'O Fair One, do you regard me with favour! If, O Sita, through pride, you dost refuse to honour me, at the end of two months I shall drink your blood!'
"Hearing these words spoken by the wicked Ravana, Janaki growing exceedingly wrath, answered with dignity:—
"'O Vilest of Titans, having uttered such a speech to the consort of Rama of immeasurable prowess, to me, the daughter-in-law of Dasaratha of the Ikshvaku line, why has your tongue not fallen out? O Vile Wretch, great indeed was your valour to bear me hence far from the illustrious Rama, in his absence! You are not even worthy to be the slave of Raghava, that invincible, loyal, courageous and illustrious warrior!'
"Thus addressed in harsh terms, Dashagriva blazed up with wrath like a fire on to which a brand has been cast and, rolling his eyes in rage, clenching his right fist he prepared to strike Mithila's daughter.
"Then all the titan women cried out: 'Hold! Hold!' and from their midst, the wife of that evil wretch, the lovely Mandodari, ran towards him and with gentle words, inspired by the love she bore him, contrived to pacify him.
"She said:—
'You whose valour is equal to Mahendra's, what need hast you for Sita? Divert thyself with me, who am in no way inferior to her or do you disport thyself with the daughters of the Gods, the Gandharvas or Yakshas. What is Sita to you?'
"Thereafter, that company of women raised up that powerful Ranger of the Night and conducted him back to his residence.
"Ravana having departed, those titan women of hideous aspect, railed at Sita in harsh and cruel terms, but Janaki paid no more heed to their speech than to a straw, and their taunts were lost on her; and those titan women, who fed on flesh, failing in their attempts, informed Ravana of Sita's unconquerable resolution, whilst others, tired of tormenting her, giving up hope, exhausted, lay down to rest.
"And while they slept, Sita, devoted to her lord, gave voice to bitter lamentation in the extremity of her distress.
"Thereafter, rising in their midst, Trijata spoke, saying:—
"'Devour me this instant, if you will, but do not lay hands on the dark-eyed Sita, daughter of Janaka, the virtuous daughter-in-law of King Dasaratha. In truth I have had a fearful dream, causing the hair to stand on end, presaging the destruction of the titans and the triumph of this one's lord. It is for us to seek the grace of Vaidehi, who alone I deem, can defend us from Raghava. Let us therefore relate this dream to her, for one who is the object of such a vision, being freed from her distress, will attain the height of felicity. By bowing low in submission, we shall earn the favour of Janaki, who alone can deliver us from this great peril!'
"Thereat that chaste and youthful woman, on hearing of the coming victory of her lord, rejoicing, said:—
"'If Trijata speak truly, then indeed will I protect you all.'
"Observing Sita's unfortunate plight, I became absorbed in thought and my mind was perturbed. Then I cast about as to how I might find some means of speaking to Janaki and I began to extol the race of Ikshvaku.
"Hearing the words I uttered embellished with the praises of those Rajarishis, that exalted lady, her eyes suffused with tears, enquired of me saying:—
'Who art you; how and on whose behest hast you come hither? From whence comes thine attachment to Rama? It behoves you to relate all to me.'
"Listening to her speech, I made answer to her in this wise:—
"'O Goddess! Rama, your consort, has found an ally endowed with supreme prowess, named Sugriva, who is the redoubtable and powerful King of the Monkeys. Know me to be his servant, Hanuman, who has come hither to you, dispatched by your lord of imperishable exploits. O Illustrious Lady, that highly effulgent son of Dasaratha, foremost of men, has sent this ring as a token to you. O Queen, what is your behest? Shall I bring you back to Rama and Lakshmana on the northern shore of the ocean?'
"Hearing this, Sita, the delight of Janaka, reflected within herself awhile and said:—
"'Suffer Raghava to destroy Ravana and himself carry me hence.'
Inclining my head to that noble and irreproachable lady, I requested some token from her which might enhance the delight of Raghava, whereupon Sita said to me:—
"'Take this excellent jewel for which you shalt be highly regarded by that One of mighty arms.'
"Thereupon, that princess of lovely limbs gave me a marvellous jewel and in a voice strangled with sobs, bade me farewell.
I bowed to that daughter of a king with deep respect and, circumambulating her began to consider returning home, but she, having searched her heart, addressed me once again, saying:—
"'O Hanuman, do you relate my story to Raghava in such wise that those two heroes, Rama and Lakshmana, will come here instantly accompanied by Sugriva, or else, having but two months to live, Kakutstha will see me no more, like one without a protector.'
"Hearing these dreadful words, a wave of anger surged over me and I instantly resolved on what I should do. Thereupon, expanding my body to the size of a mountain, burning to fight, I laid waste the grove. Then all the beasts and birds began to flee away in fear and those terrible titan women awoke and beheld the devastation.
Observing me, they all assembled and instantly ran in haste to inform Ravana, saying:—
"'O Valiant Sovereign, this thine inviolable grove has been destroyed by a wretched monkey who sets your prowess at nought. Slay that perverse creature instantly, who thus affronts you, lest he escape!'
"On this, the King of the Titans, Ravana, sent out innumerable warriors called Kinkaras and eighty thousand of those titans, armed with spears and maces, were slain by me in the grove with an iron bar. Then a few, who survived, quickly went to Ravana to inform him of the destruction of his troops.
"Thereupon I resolved to destroy the marvellous palace with its monument and slew the guards stationed there. In my fury I laid this building, the ornament of Lanka, low, whereupon Ravana sent out the son of Prahasta, Jambumalin with a company of titans of grim and fearful aspect.
"With my formidable mace I slew that mighty and skilful warrior with his retinue and Ravana, the Lord of the Titans, on hearing this, dispatched the highly powerful sons of the ministers followed by a regiment of infantry but with my iron bar I sent them all to the abode of death.
"Learning that, despite their ardour, I had struck down the sons of his ministers on the field, Ravana quickly ordered five of his heroic commanders to set out at the head of their troops, but I slew them all, whereupon Dashagriva sent out his highly powerful son, Aksha, with countless titans, to engage me in combat. Then that youthful son of Mandodari, a skilful warrior sprang into the air and I seized him by the feet, whirling him round and throwing him on the earth.
"Thereat the ten-necked Ravana, full of ire, hearing of the downfall of Aksha, sent his second son Indrajit, full of courage and martial ardour, against me and I, rendering the prowess of all those titans ineffectual, experienced extreme delight. Nevertheless, that long-armed warrior in whom Ravana had supreme confidence, inflamed with wine, continued to fight at the head of his warriors.
"And he, realising that I was invincible and seeing his forces routed, made me captive by aid of the Brahma-weapon, whereupon the titans bound me with ropes and taking hold of me brought me before Ravana.
Then that One of vicious soul entered into conversation with me and enquired of me regarding my coming to Lanka and why I had slain the titans, whereto I replied:—
"'I have done all this for Sita! To find her I came hither 1 I am the son of Maruta, the monkey Hanuman! Know me to be Rama's messenger and the minister of Sugriva. It is to carry out Rama's design that I stand before you! Hear me now O Lord of the Titans! The King of the Monkeys offers you salutations and enquires as to your welfare, O Mighty Hero I He has commissioned me to communicate this message in. words that are both fitting and in accord with duty, legitimate pleasure and profit.
"'While sojourning on Rishyamuka, that mountain covered with trees, I entered into an alliance with Raghava, that great warrior, invincible in combat, and he spoke to me saying:—'O King, my consort has been borne away by a titan; it behoves you to assist me in this matter!' Thereafter, in the presence of fire, the Lord, Raghava, who was accompanied by Lakshmana, allied himself to me in friendship, who had been deprived of my royal prerogatives by Bali.
"'And he has made me lord over all the monkeys, after slaying Bali in combat with a single arrow. It is therefore fitting that we should assist him by every means and by virtue of this contract I have despatched Hanuman unto you as envoy. Do you therefore speedily return Sita to Rama, ere those valiant monkeys overthrow your forces. Who is not conversant with the monkeys' prowess, whose aid has been solicited even by the Gods themselves?'
"Speaking thus to Ravana, he bent his furious glances on me as if he would consume me and that ruthless titan ordered me to be put to death, being unaware of my power.
"Meanwhile his high-souled brother Bibishana, endowed with great sagacity, interceded for me in the following wise; saying:
'O You Foremost of the Titans, abandon your resolve, which is not in accord with the royal code. The death of an envoy is not sanctioned by royal tradition, O Titan. A messenger simply communicates the mandate of his master I O You of incomparable prowess, there is no warranty for his destructon, yet, if his guilt be considerable, he may be mutilated.'
"At these words of Bibishana, Ravana issued this command to the demons: 'Set fire to the monkey's tail!'
"On this behest, those titans wrapped my tail in hemp and cotton rags and they, in well-wrought armour struck me with their clenched fists and sticks and set fire to my tail. Bound and fettered with ropes by the titans, I submitted to it, resolving to set fire to the city. Thus pinioned and enveloped in flames, those warriors, shouting, led me along the royal highway to the gates of the city. There, contracting my body I assumed a diminutive form and casting off my bonds, I seized an iron bar and assailed those titans, thereafter with one bound vaulting the gate, I rapidly burnt down the whole city and its gates and towers with my flaming tail, resembling the fire that consumes all beings at the end of the world.
"Seeing Lanka in flames I reflected with anxiety that Janaki must without doubt have perished since there was no comer of the city that had not been reduced to ashes. Thinking thus, overcome with grief, I overheard the Caranas saying in auspicious accents:—
"'Janaki has not perished in the flames!' and hearing these wonderful words, proclaimed by their enchanting voices, I regained my courage. I was thereafter reassured by many auspicious signs, that Janaki had been saved from the flames and though my tail was on fire, I had not been consumed! My heart was filled with joy and the wind spread its delicious perfumes. By virtue of these propitious manifestations, by my confidence in Rama's prowess and in Sita and the words pronounced by the great sages, felicity filled my soul. Then, re-visiting Vaidehi once again, I took leave of her and, scaling the Mount Arishta, leapt in this direction in order to see you all once more. Following the path of the wind, sun, moon and the Siddhas and Gandharvas, I found you here.
"By the grace of Rama and your prowess, I have carried out Sugriva's charge to the uttermost. I have related all to you in detail and it now remains for you to accomplish what is still to be done."