Having completed his narrative, Hanuman, born of Mamta, added these significant words:—"Fruitful have been the endeavours of Rama and Sugriva! Having witnessed Sita's constancy, I am happy at heart! By the power of her penances, the most illustrious Sita is able to uphold the earth or consume it with her ire, 0 Monkeys. The power of Ravana also, created by austerities, is great and it is because of this that he was not destroyed when he laid hands on Sita. Nay, the flame to which one reaches out is not so greatly to be feared as is Sita's wrath.
"It now behoves all the mighty monkeys and others, with Jambavan at their head to take part in this expedition, the purpose of which is now known to you, in order to behold Vaidehi re-united with those two princes.
"Alone I was able to enter Lanka, inhabited by titans and have afflicted that city by my prowess, as also Ravana and his people. What more could I not do therefore with the courageous and powerful Plavagas, endowed with heroism and martial prowess, strong and eager for victory?
"I shall destroy Ravana with his entire army, his sons, brothers and followers in combat. I shall destroy all the titans and circumvent those invisible weapons and other missiles, bestowed on Indrajita by Brahma, Rudra, Vayu, Varuna, scattering them and slaying the titans; with your sanction my prowess will bring them under restraint. Hills and mountains torn up by me will I discharge continuously, which even the Gods themselves cannot withstand, how much less those rangers of the night? Were the sea to overflow or Mount Mandara move from its place, Jambavan will never be daunted by an enemy host in conflict. And that heroic monkey, the son of Bali, is alone able to destroy the entire host of Rakshasas. With the movement of his vigorous thighs, the powerful Nila could overthrow Mount Mandara itself, how much more the titans on the field of battle. Amongst the Celestials, the Titans, Yakshas, Gandharvas, serpents or birds, show me any who could withstand Dvivida? Nor do I know any who could resist those two sons of the Ashvins, endowed with supreme energy, the foremost of monkeys, in the arena.
"Single-handed I have laid Lanka low and, setting it on fire have reduced it to ashes. On every highway I proclaimed aloud:
'May Victory crown the invincible Rama and Lakshmana! May the King Sugriva, whose support is Raghava, prosper. I am the servant of the King of Koshala, the offspring of Pavana! I am Hanuman!' I have announced this everywhere.
"In the centre of the Ashoka grove of the vicious-souled Ravana, the virtuous Sita waits forlornly at the foot of the Shimshapa tree surrounded by titan women, emaciated with sorrow and suffering, resembling the orb of the moon bereft of its splendour in the midst of cloud. Spuming Ravana, whose powers have rendered him arrogant, Vaidehi, the daughter of Janaka of fair limbs, remains undeviatingly faithful to her lord. Wholly devoted to Rama, the lovely Vaidehi, thinks of him alone, as Poulomi, Purandara. Clad in a single garment, soiled with dust, I beheld her in the grove surrounded by titan women who were heaping insults upon her. Her hair, dressed in a single braid that unfortunate being was absorbed in the thought of her lord. Lying on the earth, pale as a lotus at the approach of winter, separated by Ravana from the object of her love, she had resolved to yield up her life.
"With difficulty I was able to re-kindle Sita's hopes by addressing that damsel, whose eyes resemble a doe's, and relating all to her. And she, hearing of the alliance between Rama and Sugriva became happy and, fixed in her devotion, her conjugal affection reached its zenith. Fortunate is that ten-necked demon that she has not destroyed him, due to the boon he received from Brahma; but it is for Rama that the destruction of that monster is reserved.
"Already greatly reduced, Janaki grows frailer every day, in Rama's absence, as learning wanes that is prosecuted on the first day of the lunar fortnight.
"Thus lives Sita worn out by grief! It is for you to take counsel as to what it is proper to do in the matter."