Hearing these words, the son of Bali, Angada, said:—
"The sons of the Ashvins are exceedingly powerful and proud of the boon conferred on them by the Grandsire of the World, who in order to honour the Ashvi rendered those two monkeys incapable of being slain by any. This unique privilege inflamed their pride and those two powerful warriors, having overcome the mighty celestial host, drank up the nectar of immortality. These two, inflamed with ire, are able to destroy the entire city of Lanka with its horses, chariots and elephants, what of other monkeys? I myself am capable of destroying the city with its titans and the mighty Ravana! How much more so if I am accompanied by powerful warriors, masters of themselves, well-armed, skilful and desirous of victory?
"We have heard that the courageous son of Vayu alone set fire to Lanka. He has seen the divine Sita but has not brought her back. I deem it unfitting that warriors as renowned as you are acquaint Rama of this. There are none in leaping and in prowess, whose skill and bravery equal yours in the worlds of the Immortals or amongst the Daityas, O Foremost of Monkeys. Few have escaped the carnage wrought by Hanuman, therefore it only remains for us to slay Ravana and the rest of the titans and bring back the daughter of Janaka, placing her between Rama and Lakshmana! What need have we to trouble those other residents of Kishkindha? It is for us to proceed to Lanka and, having slain the titans, return to Rama, Lakshmana and Sugriva."
Such was the project of Angada, whereupon Jambavan, the foremost of monkeys, in his wisdom, cheerfully made answer in words fraught with good sense, saying:—
"O Great Monkey, O You of supreme understanding, we have received a mandate from the King of the Monkeys and the virtuous Rama to explore the southern region to its utmost confines, but we have not been commanded to bring back Sita nor would it find favour with that lion among monarchs, Rama, if we did so, for he, proud of his lineage, has vowed before all the leading monkeys that he will himself deliver her. How should his words be rendered null and void? What is the use of undertaking that which is not conducive to his pleasure? This display of our prowess will prove fruitless, O Foremost of Monkeys 1 Let us therefore return to where Rama, with Lakshmana and the illustrious Sugriva can be found and inform them of the result of our quest.
What you have proposed finds favour with us, O Prince, yet it is by adhering to Rama's design that you should look for success."