All the heroic monkeys headed by Angada and the great ape Hanuman highly approved Jambavan's words and, those foremost of monkeys led by the son of Vayu leaping down from the summit of the Mahendra Mountain, bounded forward. Resembling the mountains Meru and Mandara, they appeared like elephants maddened with ichor, covering the whole of space as it were with their shadow, their eyes fixed on the highly powerful Hanuman gifted with velocity, having control of his senses and honoured by the Siddhas. Resolved on bringing about the success of Rama's design, proud of the results obtained, desirous of communicating their auspicious tidings, all those virtuous inhabitants of the forest, eager to assist Rama and avid for combat, jumping and frisking, reached Madhuvana.
And they came to that celestial grove protected by Sugriva, planted with countless trees, enchanting to look upon, where none might enter. And Sugriva's maternal uncle, the mighty monkey Dadhimukha guarded that picturesque and spacious garden belonging to the Lord of Monkeys. Extremely anxious to partake of the fruits of that beautiful orchard, those tawny-coloured monkeys, greatly delighted, craved permission of the prince to taste the honey, yellow as they. Then he graciously allowed those venerable monkeys, headed by Jambavan, to drink of the honey.
Thereupon, under Angada's command, authorised by that youthful son of Bali, those monkeys ascended the trees, swarming with bees, feasting on the fruit and roots and, in an access of intoxication, began to frolic here and there.
Singing, laughing, dancing, bowing, declaiming, running, capering and clapping their hands, some supported others, some quarrelled and some talked at random. Some leapt from tree to tree, springing down from the highest branches, some bounded into the air or chased each other round the trees from rock to rock, responding to each other's songs and laughter, groans and lamentations, exchanging blow for blow.
Then a general confusion arose amongst that host of monkeys and there were none who were not inebriated or inflamed with excitement.
Seeing the wood laid waste, the trees stripped of their leaves and flowers, Dadhimukha was filled with anger and sought to restrain them. But that heroic and elderly monkey, the protector of the wood, was in turn upbraided by those insolent monkeys whereupon he grew even more determined to defend the forest that was entrusted to his care against them. Thereafter he spoke to some in harsh terms without fear or forethought and struck others with the palm of his hands, approaching some threateningly and others with soothing words.
They, however, excited with liquor, restrained by Dadhimukha, began to ill-treat him brazenly without reflecting that the fault lay with them, scratching him with their nails, biting him with their teeth, assailing him with blows of their hands and feet, and knocking him senseless laid waste to the whole of Madhuvana.