Seeing that monkey prostrating himself, his forehead touching the earth, Sugriva, his heart moved, said to him:—
"Rise, Rise! Why art you lying prostrate at my feet? Speak without fear! Why hast you come hither? It behoves you to make your purpose plain. Is all well in Madhuvana? I wish to know everything, O Monkey!"
Thus reassured by the magnanimous Sugriva, the highly sagacious Dadhimukha rose and spoke as follows:—
"O Lord, that wood which neither you nor Bah suffered to be enjoyed by the monkeys, has been laid waste by them! Seeking to drive them away with my attendants, they, disregarding me, continued to feast there merrily. I resisted their depredations with the assistance of my guards, but without showing any consideration for me, O Prince, those savages continued their orgy. These attendants of mine, assaulted by them, were driven from the wood and those countless powerful monkeys, their eyes inflamed with anger, broke their arms and feet and, crushing them between their thighs, flung them into the air. You are the living lord of these warriors who have been assaulted by those monkeys, who even now are pillaging Madhuvana and quaffing the honey."
While Sugriva listened to these tidings, the sagacious Lakshmana, Slayer of his Foes, enquired of him saying:—"O King, who is this monkey, the guard over the forest who has come to you and what distress has led him to speak thus?"
Being thus addressed by the high-souled Lakshmana, Sugriva, skilled in converse, answered:—
"O Noble Lakshmana, this is Dadhimukha and this heroic monkey informs me that those war-like forest dwellers led by Angada have drunk the honey and eaten the fruits of the orchard. Such an escapade would not have been indulged in by those who had failed in their mission. Assuredly they have been successfill since they have devastated the wood. It is for this reason that they have beaten with their knees those who have obstructed their revelry and have disregarded the valiant Dadhimukha whom I myself appointed as guardian to my orchard. In sooth, Hanuman and none other must have discovered the divine Sita. Hanuman alone could accomplish such a feat. The success of that enterprise depended on the sagacity of that foremost of monkeys endowed with courage, strength and learning. Where Jambavan and Angada are the leaders and Hanuman the moving spirit, success is assured. Assuredly Madhuvana has been laid waste by those heroic monkeys led by Angada. Having explored the southern region, on their return this orchard excited their cupidity, whereupon they plundered it and drank the honey, assaulting the guards and beating them with their knees. This monkey, the gentle-voiced Dadhimukha, renowned for his prowess has come to communicate these tidings to me. O Mighty Saumitri, undoubtedly Sita must have been found else these monkeys would never have destroyed the wood bestowed on us by the Gods."
Hearing these words pleasant to the ear falling from Sugriva's lips, the virtuous Lakshmana and Raghava were overcome with joy and the illustrious Sugriva, exultant on receiving these tidings from Dadhimukha, answered that guardian of the forest, saying:—
"Highly gratified am I that those warriors, being successful, have eaten the honey and fruit! One should bear with the arrogance of those who have been victorious. Return to the Madhu Wood immediately and send all those monkeys with Hanuman at their head, here 1 With these two descendants of Raghu, I wish to interrogate those deer of the branches without delay, who, with the boldness of lions have fulfilled their task, in order to learn if they have discovered Sita."
Beholding those two princes, their eyes dilated with joy, in the height of felicity, the King of the Monkeys, realising the success of his enterprise was near, experienced extreme satisfaction.