Thus addressed by Sugriva, the monkey Dadhimukha cheerfully offered obeisance to him and gave salutations to Raghava and Lakshmana. Thereafter, having honoured Sugriva and those powerful sons of the House of Raghu, escorted by his attendants, he sprang into the air. Departing with the same speed by which he had come, he descended from the sky and, alighting on the earth, entered the Madhu wood. There he beheld those foremost of monkeys, now sober, spending the hours happily, having relieved themselves, the outcome of drinking honey, and approaching them, that hero with joined palms addressed Angada in the following words:—
"O Noble Prince, do not harbour any ill-feeling towards the guards, who, enraged, sought to drive you away by force. May peace attend you! O You of great strength, do you partake of the honey freely which is thine by right, since you are the heir-apparent and owner of the wood. It behoves you to pardon us for our wrath, arising out of ignorance! Like unto your sire formerly and Sugriva, so art you Lord of the monkey host! O Irreproachable Prince, I have related all unto thine uncle, who, hearing of the presence of the monkeys here, of thine arrival and also of the devastation of the forest, was not the least incensed, rather was he gratified. Highly pleased, your paternal uncle, Sugriva, King of the Monkeys, said: 'Send them all here without delay!'"
Hearing those words of Dadhimukha, Angada, Prince of the Monkeys, skilled in speech, addressed all his companions, saying:—
"O You Leaders of the Monkey Host, undoubtedly all these events have been related to Rama. This may be inferred by Dadhimukha's tidings. It does not behove us to linger here further, our mission having been accomplished, O Slayers of your Foes! You have all drunk honey in full measure, O Heroic Forest Dwellers, nothing remains for us but to rejoin Sugriva. Whatever all of you counsel me to do, I shall put into effect. I am your servant and, though the heir-apparent, it is not for me to issue orders to you. You have all accomplished your task; it would therefore be unfitting for me to treat you arbitrarily."
Hearing these admirable words of Angada, those monkeys, full of delight, spoke thus:—
"Who, of your status, O Foremost of Monkeys, would speak thus? Drunk with power, each says: 'I am the leader!' None but you would utter words of such felicity. Thine humility augurs well for us. We are all ready to return to Sugriva the King of the Monkeys without delay, but without your word of command none among us is able to advance a single step."
On this, Angada answered them, saying:—"It is well, let us go!", whereupon all those warriors sprang into the air and the space was entirely filled as if by stones shot from a mortar.
Preceded by Angada, who was followed by Hanuman, those Plavamgamas bounded tempestuously into the air with a great clamour, like clouds driven before the wind.
Angada having arrived near to Sugriva, the King of the Monkeys addressd the lotus-eyed Rama, who was consumed with grief, and said:—
"Be of good courage! Rest assured the divine Sita has been found! These monkeys would not have returned otherwise, the time fixed by me being already past; I infer this from Angada's joy! Had the long-armed Angada, the foremost of monkeys not been successful, he would not have come back to me. If they had not succeeded in their enterprise, after such an escapade, that youthful prince, his mind troubled, would have appeared dejected. Without having seen the daughter of Janaka, they would not have dared to destroy Madhuvana which was obtained from my forbears or attacked that venerable monkey who guards it. O Noble Son of Kaushalya, O You fixed in your vow and faithful to thine obligations, in sooth Hanuman and none else has discovered Sita. No other is qualified to encompass this end. O You, the foremost of the virtuous, the means to success are intelligence, resolution, valour and knowledge and Hanuman is endowed with all these. Where Jambavan with Angada leads and Hanuman directs the work, there can be but one outcome. O You of immeasurable prowess, have no anxiety! Those dwellers of the wood, having reached the height of insolence, would not have entered into an escapade of this kind had they failed in their mission. They have laid waste Madhuvana and taken the honey, I infer therefore that they have been successful."
At that instant, cries of "Kilakila" resounded in the sky from those inhabitants of the woods, who, proud of Hanuman's exploit, were proceeding towards Kishkindha, thus proclaiming their trumph.
Hearing that tremendous clamour, the King of the Monkeys, curling and uncurling his tail, became greatly excited, whilst those monkeys, eager to see Rama, with Angada at their head and Hanuman before them, drunk with joy, alighted from the sky in front of their sovereign and Raghava.
Thereafter the mighty-armed Hanuman, inclining his head in salutations, informed Rama of Sita's physical and spiritual well-being. And hearing from Hanuman the auspicious words sweet as Amrita: "I have seen Sita", the joy of Rama and Lakshmana was extreme and Lakshmana gazed on Sugriva, who had placed the matter in the hands of the son of Pavana, with profound respect, whilst Raghava, the destroyer of his foes, in extreme felicity looked on Hanuman with veneration.