Being thus addressed by the high-souled Raghava, Hanuman began to relate all that Sita had said to him:—
"O Lion among Men, in order to give credence to my report, the divine Sita described what took place on Mount Cittrakuta. Sleeping happily at your side, Janaki one day was the first to wake, when suddenly a crow wounded her breast with its beak. O Rama, you were then asleep on Sita's lap and that crow again attacked her, pecking her cruelly, and, being bathed in blood and suffering, she did arouse you.
O Slayer of your foes, seeing her breast wounded, you, like an angry serpent didst enquire, saying:—
'Who, O Timid One, has with his claws wounded you? Who has dared to play with a five-headed snake?'
Then, looking here and there, you didst perceive the crow with its talons sharp and bloody standing before you. And that foremost of birds was Indra's son, who with the speed of the wind disappeared into the earth. Then you, O Mighty-armed One, didst roll thine eyes furiously and resolve to destroy that crow. Taking a tuft of Kusha grass from where you had lain, pronouncing the Brahma-mantra, you didst hurl the blade that blazed up like the fire at the dissolution of the world at the bird and that flaming grass followed in its wake.
"Forsaken by the Gods, who were terrified, that crow traversed the Three Worlds without finding a protector and returned to you, O Subduer of your foes, seeking refuge in you and falling on the earth before you. Thereupon, O Kakutstha, you in your compassion didst pardon it, albeit it merited death. But thinking it improper that the purpose of the weapon should be rendered void, you didst destroy the right eye of that crow, O Raghava. Then paying homage to you and to King Dasaratha, that bird, thus delivered, returned to its abode.
"Sita said:—
'O Raghava, you are the foremost of those skilled in weapons, mighty and full of integrity, why dost you not discharge your shafts against the titans? Neither the Gods, Gandharvas, Asuras or Maruta can withstand you in battle. If you in your magnanimity hast any regard for me, then with your well-directed shafts destroy Ravana without delay. Under the behest of his brother, why does not Lakshmana, the scourge of his foes and the foremost of men, fly to my defence?
"'How is it that those two mighty lions among men, the equals of Vayu and Agni in valour, whom the Gods themselves are unable to overcome, have forgotten me? Assuredly I have committed a great sin, since those two scourges of their foes, who are able to do so, do not unite to deliver me!'
"To those plaintive and gentle words of the noble Vaidehi, I answered:
'O Illustrious Lady, Rama is sorely stricken on account of thine absence and seeing his brother a prey to sorrow, Lakshmana too is suffering, I swear it. Since I have found you at last, the time for lamentation is past. In an instant you shalt see the end of your woes, O Lovely Princess. Those two sons of a king, the foremost of men and subduers of their foes, eager to see you once more, will reduce Lanka to ashes. Having slain the cruel Ravana with his kinsfolk in battle, Raghava will take you back to his capital, O Charming One! O Irreproachable Lady, do you bestow some token on me that is known to Rama and will bring him delight.'
"Thereat Sita, glancing round on every side, drew from her robe an excellent jewel which had fastened her locks and bestowed it on me, O Mighty One.
"Then I, inclining my head in salutation, took the gem into my hands and made ready to depart, O Beloved of the Raghu Race 1 Whereupon, seeing me about to take my leave expanding my body, Sita, the beautiful and unfortunate daughter of Janaka, her face bathed in tears, addressed me in a voice strangled with sobs and, in the intensity of distress at my departure, said to me:—
"'Happy art you, O Monkey, since you shalt behold the mighty Rama whose eyes resemble lotuses and the long-armed Lakshmana, my illustrious brother-in-law!'
"To these words of Maithili, I made answer:—
'Climb on my back without delay, O Noble Lady, and this very day I will show you Sugriva, Lakshmana and your consort Rama, O Fortunate Dark-eyed Princess!'
"Then that Goddess answered me, saying:—
'It is not proper for me to climb on your back of mine own accord, O Great Monkey! Although before this I was touched by the demon, it was on account of my helplessness, subject as I was to destiny. Do you thyself repair to where those two princes are!'
After this she added:—
"'O Hanuman, do you greet those two lions among men with Sugriva and his ministers! Do you describe unto Rama and Lakshmana of immeasurable prowess the intensity of my despair and the insults heaped on me by the titans. May your journey be prosperous, O Foremost of Monkeys!'
"Thus did that illustrious princess speak to me in the midst of her grief. Reflecting on my narrative, have faith in the integrity of the virtuous Sita."